While a section of the non-Brahmin priests has moved the Kerala High Court seeking to quash the notification inviting applications only from the Malayala Brahmin priests, a few others have approached the board seeking to continue the practice
The Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB) plans to hold consultations with stakeholders to evolve a consensus on the contentious issue of reservation of Sabarimala Temple priesthood for Malayala Brahmins.

While a section of the non-Brahmin priests has moved the Kerala High Court seeking to quash the notification inviting applications only from the Malayala Brahmin priests, a few others have approached the board seeking to continue the practice.
“As the demand for continuing the practice and modifying it has come up, the board will discuss the issue. Changes in the temple practices can be introduced only after holding discussions with all the stakeholders concerned. The board is yet to decide on whom to be invited for discussion and when to hold it,” said N. Vasu, president of the TDB.
Regarding the ongoing litigation before the High Court, Mr. Vasu said the board would seek to maintain status quo regarding the priesthood. However, the board was bound to implement the court decisions, he said.

The court is likely to consider the case on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, the board rejected the applications of six non-Brahmin priests who had applied for the posts of Mel Shanthis in Sabarimala and Malikappuram as they failed to meet the caste criteria.
“My application was rejected as I did not belong to the Malayala Brahmin caste. Earlier as well, my application was rejected on the same ground, though I am amply qualified to be appointed as the Mel Shanthi,” said C. V. Vishnunarayanan, one of the priests who had moved the High Court.
Akhila Kerala Thantri Mandalam, a collective of Brahmin chief priests, suggested continuing the temple practice regarding priesthood.
Priests from other Hindu castes have been serving in Bhadrakali temples of Vellayini, Mulankadakam and Kodungalloor. It’s also the case with the Padmanabhaswamy temple, Thiruvananthapuram. The centuries-old temple practices cannot be changed in one stroke, said Mandalam general secretary S. Radhakrishnan Potti.
Any change in the temple practices shall be introduced only after consultations with stakeholders, including the representatives of priests, vedic experts, judges, Devaswom boards, and the Hindu community organisations, he said.

Inquiry ordered into charge that they were harassed by the police
The detention of four transgender women pilgrims at Erumely by the Kerala Police, preventing them from travelling to Sabarimala, drew social media attention when one of them played out their interaction with the police on Facebook Live.
In their online narrative, the women said the police had shamed them for their gender and asked them why they could not go to Sabarimala dressed as men. The police also allegedly threatened their car driver.
The transgenders, Ananya, Tripti, Avanthika and Renjumol, hail from Kottayam and Ernakulam districts. They had arrived attired in dark saris and bearing the “Irumudi” bundle carried by Ayyappa devotees.
District Police Chief, Kottayam, Hari Sankar, told The Hindu that he had tasked the Dy.SP, Special Branch, Kottayam, to investigate the grievances aired by the group. He said the police were forced to prevent their journey because the law enforcement lacked legal clarity regarding the entry of transgenders to Sabarimala.

Mr. Sankar said the Supreme Court judgment on September 28 upheld the right of women, irrespective of their age, to worship at the shrine. However, the order was silent on the entry of transgenders and other sexual minorities. Mr. Sankar said he asked the group to move the ‘committee of observers’ appointed by the Kerala High Court to clear the ambiguity regarding their right to enter the temple.
(The committee comprises two retired High Court judges and a ranking IPS officer with powers to “supervise” the police and administrative arrangements in Sabarimala and take on the spot decisions if need be.)
The police also told the transgenders that the police would escort them to the sanctum if they got the committee’s nod. However, they would have to inform the force in advance of their darshan plan.
More than 90,000 people had thronged Sabarimala on Sunday. They had arrived in more than 6,500 vehicles. Mr. Sankar said that providing the transgender women special protection on a busy day would have severely strained police resources.
Meanwhile, the transgenders were scheduled to arrive in Thiruvananthapuram on Monday and meet High Court appointed observer and Director General, Fire and Rescue Services, A. Hemachandran, to state their case.

30-40% fall in devotees visiting the hill shrine following the violent protests
Andhra Pradesh accounts for a substantial number of pilgrims visiting Sabarimala every year. But there has been a fall of about 30 to 40% in the estimated 10 lakh devotees in the wake of the Supreme Court allowing women of child-bearing age to visit the temple and vociferous protests that followed.
Shops selling black dress, ‘deeksha’ and pooja material are unhappy as there has been a drastic dip in the sale as many have postponed their pilgrimage.
“I used to tie over 100 ‘irumudis’ (bundle containing ritual offerings) each day. But not even 60 people turn up at the temple for commencing the pilgrimage everyday,” says Paramkusam Rangaswamy taking a small break during the rituals.
The RTC operated only four special buses since the Makaravilaku season began on November 15, says Nellore Regional Manager G.V. Ravi Verma who oversees parking of the State-run and private buses and other amenities for pilgirms at Nilackal.

“The rush has come down this year,” he told The Hindu.
“I used to visit Salem in Tamil Nadu at least thrice during the Makaravilaku/Makarajyothi pilgrimage season to source black dresses for sale across Andhra Pradesh. This year, the first set of consignment has not be sold,” says a wholesale textile shopowner P. Nagaeswara Rao.
Blessing for some
A group of women devotees present for the “irumudikettu” says, “We are happy sending our menfolk to Sabarimala. No woman in child-bearing age, who believes in the Ayyappa legend and traditions evolved over a period, will even think of going to the hill shrine.
The fallout has come as a blessing in disguise for pilgrims . “I have never had the opportunity to touch each of the 18 sacred steps during the previous visits. But I was able to do so this year,” Srikanth Reddy says on return from Sabarimala. They spent more time in having the darshan, adds another devotee Ramesh Babu.

A Division Bench of the Kerala High Court on Monday observed that the situation at Sabarimala had changed and there was no problem for the pilgrims to have a peaceful darshan.
The Bench made the oral observation while disposing of a petition filed by three persons from Thrissur seeking a directive to the police not to restrain them from having darshan during the Mandalam-Makaravilakku season.
When the petition came up for hearing, Government Pleader V. Manu submitted that the petitioners were involved in several cases in connection with the protests against the Supreme Court verdict allowing entry for women of all ages in Sabarimala. In fact, the government had no objection to their having a peaceful darshan at Sabarimala. They could undertake pilgrimage as true and genuine devotees. The police had taken action only against protesters.
The petitions were filed by K.V. Vibin, Akhil Mohanan, and O.B. Bibin. According to them, the police earlier sent them back from Pampa when they undertook the pilgrimage, alleging that they were BJP workers.

Frequent disruption of House has not diluted govt stance
The Sabarimala agitation has seemingly left the United Democratic Front (UDF) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in a dilemma over taking forward the protests to a logical conclusion.
With the Assembly session set to conclude on Thursday and the government refusing to relent on their demand to lift the ban orders in Sabarimala, the political fate of three Opposition MLAs and former BJP State president C.K. Padmanabhan remains uncertain.
V.S. Sivakumar, N. Jayaraj and Parakkal Abdulla have been staging satyagraha at the portals of the Assembly building, while Mr. Padmanabhan has replaced his party's State general secretary A.N. Radhakrishnan for the fast in front of the Secretariat here.
The Opposition has been consistently raising the issue on the floor of the House and sought Speaker P. Sreeramakrishnan’s mediation to end the satyagraha, though without success.

The government stood by its stance that clamping ban orders was something that fell within the jurisdiction of the officials who constantly reviewed the law and order situation in Sabarimala and its precincts and hence it could only act on their advice.
Frequent disruptions of the Assembly proceedings have not led to any dilution of the government stance and once the current session comes to a close, the Opposition MLAs would have to call off the satyagraha or shift the protest venue.
In October 2016, the UDF had launched a fast in the Assembly in protest against the fee structure in self-financing colleges but had to wind up the protest without wresting any assurance from the government.
Assembly poll results
With the Assembly election results in five State having robbed the sheen and verve of the BJP, mobilisation of the cadre to continue the agitation may be a tall challenge for the State unit.
Armed by the favourable reports of the supervisory committee appointed by the High Court on Sabarimala, the government may not be willing for a climbdown just yet. The current move may be to defuse the agitation of both the Opposition and the BJP by delaying a decision, which could eventually force them to drop the movement on some premise. The next two days are being considered to be quite crucial for both the Opposition and the BJP as they would have to either force the government into taking a decision or resort to some other means to take the agitation to a closure, sources said.


TDB officials attribute it to lean pilgrim flow to temple
With the 41-day Mandalam pilgrim season crossing the halfway mark, the revenue loss at Sabarimala continues to worry the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB).
TDB sources told The Hindu on Tuesday that the collection at Sabarimala during the ongoing pilgrim is low compared to that of the previous one.
Senior TDB officials attribute this to the lean pilgrim inflow in the wake of the curbs imposed on pilgrim movement at Sabarimala and surrounding areas.
For the first time in its history, Sabarimala witnessed vehement protests by Sangh Parivar workers following the move by certain woman’s rights activists to visit the Ayyappa temple against the backdrop of the Supreme Court verdict permitting entry for women of all age groups to worship at the temple.
Sangh Parivar call

Police actions at Nilackal and Pampa and the Sangh Parivar call to devotees to discontinue their practice of offering donations to the temple had badly affected the TDB revenue during the annual pilgrim season.
Official sources said the revenue collection at Sabarimala during the first 23 days of the ongoing pilgrim season was ₹48 crore against ₹85 crore during the same period the previous season.
Aravana sales
However, there were signs of Aravana sales picking up, according to the TDB. The board has put the average Aravana sales at 1,30,000 cans a day during the past four days. TDB executive officer D. Sudheeshkumar said the board had 20 lakh cans as buffer stock as on Tuesday. Appam sales though remains sluggish.
The 41-day Mandalam pilgrim season will come to a close with the Mandalapuja on December 27.


HC committee of observers intimated of police stance
The State police have reportedly told the committee of observers appointed by the Kerala High Court that it will be inexpedient to withdraw the police arrangements at the Sannidhanam, Pampa and Nilackal or lift the prohibitory orders now in place at the religiously sensitive high-security zone.
A top officer said any such move would allow Right-wing organisations to seize the initiative in the dispute regarding the entry of women between the age of 10 and 50 to Sabarimala. Such groups have proved their capability to turn the Sannidhanam into a conflict zone at will, and any untoward incident near the sanctum would entail grave law and order repercussions for Kerala.
The committee comprises two retired High Court judges and a ranking IPS officer with powers to “supervise” the police and administrative arrangements in Sabarimala. The police said they had told the committee that they had no plans to block pilgrims or deprive them of space to worship near the sanctum. The measures in place were oriented towards regulating pilgrims to reduce the possibility of stampede and rush-related accidents when the crowded Mandala Puja phase commenced on December 15.
Officers said the latest intelligence forecasts suggested a season of protests till the pilgrimage ended on January 22. The Sabarimala Karma Samathi and the Hindu Aikya Vedi have vowed to expand their agitation. The organisations have dared the government by announcing public lighting of lamps and prayer conventions on New Year’s Day to “defeat and politically counter” the “human wall of women to protect progressive values”. The BJP has also pledged to defeat the wall. 
The police said the circumstances could bring Sangh Parivar outfits in head-to-head conflict with organisations such as the SNDP and the Kerala Pulayar Maha Sabha, which support the wall. Senior police officers said meetings were on to cobble together a plan to prevent clashes between the opposing groups. The proposed “wall of women” covers the entire length of the State from Kasaragod to Thiruvananthapuram, an approximate 640 km.

A legislation to maintain Sabarimala’s ecological balance has been mooted by the Assembly Committee on Environment headed by Mulakkara Retnakaran.
A detailed study on the dwindling population of flora and fauna and other changes in the area due to environment pollution has been called for by the committee in the 15th report for 2016-19 tabled in the Assembly on Wednesday.
Along with implementing the Ropeway project mooted in the Master Plan, environmental friendly mode of transport had been suggested for movement of pilgrims proceeding from the base camp at Nilackal to Pampa to reduce the pollution from automobiles. Pilgrims coming in motorcycles should not be allowed beyond Nilackal. The existing arrangements for transportation of pilgrims from Nilackal should continue.
The committee has asked the Travancore Devaswom Board to ensure that the shops leased out in Sabarimala, Pampa, Nilackal and other places do not supply plastic carry bags to pilgrims. Erumeli, Sanniddhanam and Pampa should be declared as plastic free zones and cloth bags should be promoted.

The committee report, which is based on the complaints and a fact-finding mission, has also called for a ban on the use of synthetic sindoor being sold to pilgrims and used for Pettah thullal. Plastic should be avoided in Erumediketttu and the help of neighbouring State governments should be sought.
The use of oil and shampoo by pilgrims during bathing in Pampa should be banned and monitoring system should be set up. The services and expertise of IIT Madras should be used to create products out of the abandoned clothes in Pampa if the agencies fail to check it.
A trail created in River Ganga at Haridwar for the pilgrims to perform rituals has also been mooted at Pampa. Afforestation has been proposed to protect the banks of the Pampa. The committee has favoured solar fencing and iron bridge for the 110-acre dumping yard at Nilackal to check wild animals.
Besides, ecofriendly temporary bridges and flyovers, garbage plants of high capacity, taxi stand and comfort station had been proposed at Erumeli to take care of needs of pilgrims.
A drinking water project had been proposed at the hill top. The TDB has also been asked to set up a legal framework to monitor the traders who come to make money in Erumeli and Sabarimala during the pilgrimage season and indulge in damaging the ecology. Money should be taken from such traders in advance for waste management. A portion of the revenue that reaches the temple should be used by the board to clean the hill shrine and Pampa.
The committee has called for a scientific pilgrimage system in Sabarimala and Erumeli with the active involvement of all agencies to ensure that the environment is not affected. The Forest and Environment Departments has been asked to work with Agricultural University to come up with plants and trees that can absorb the waste from the earth and clean the soil. Such plants and trees should be planted along the banks of Pampa and rivulets.
Bringing jaggery in plastic sacks to Sabarimala should be replaced with wicker basket and jute sack, as abandoned plastic sacks into the forest are consumed by wild animals.

Sri Ayyappa Bhaktha Sabha, Mahalingapuram, will organise ‘Ayyappa Guruswamigal Sangamam’ at Meenakshi Women’s College, Kodambakkam on December 16 at 4 p.m.
It will be organised jointly with the Dharma Rakshana Samiti.
The meeting will be held in the light of the recent SC judgement that permitted women of all age groups to visit Sabarimala.
S. Gurumurthy, Editor, Tughlak, Kantaru Mahesh Mohanaru Thanthri, Chief Hereditary High Priest of Sabarimala Temple, Paripoornananda Saraswati, founder of Sripeetham in Andhra Pradesh and P.G. Sasikumar Varma, president of the Pandalam Palace Coordination Committee will address the gathering.


Many devotees scared to visit temple owing to restrictions, says SHRC member
Obstructing women devotees who wish to visit the Sabarimala temple was a violation of their human rights, a member of the Kerala State Human Rights Commission has said.
P. Mohanadas, judicial member of the commission, also said here on Thursday that many devotees were scared to visit the Sabarimala temple because of the restrictions imposed there. It was sad to see the state of affairs at Sabarimala and the difficulties devotees were facing there, he said.
Denying a devotee a chance to worship there was also a human rights violation.
However, he said that the Supreme Court did not consider customs and traditions while delivering its verdict, and only constitutional principles were looked at. Mr. Mohanadas claimed that the apex court had not directed all women to go and worship there. 
Those women who visited the shrine after the verdict were non-believers and activists and they were out to create trouble there. It was the government’s responsibility to prevent their attempt. Mr. Mohanadas said that the problems should have been solved through a consensus. The facilities provided to the devotees were not up to the mark, he said.


Travancore Devaswom Board revenue collection dips by ₹51.9 crore
The Sabarimala Ayyappa temple on Monday witnessed heavy rush, probably the largest influx of pilgrims this season.
According to police sources, as many as 80,000 pilgrims crossed the door-framed metal detectors at Pampa by 4 p.m.
Long queue
The queue at the Ayyappa temple extended beyond the Valiyanadapandal in the afternoon.
For the first time in the past one month, pilgrims had to wait for a few hours inside the barricades at the Valiyanadapandal to ascend the holy 18-steps leading to the temple.
Package for Chengannur
The Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB) would launch a development project at an estimate of ₹18 crore for providing pilgrim amenities at Chengannur, which has been identified as a major base camp of Sabarimala pilgrims, board president A.Padmakumar said.
Gateway
Talking to the media at Sabarimala, Mr. Padmakumar said Railways too had declared Chengannur the gateway to Sabarimala.
The Travancore Devaswom Board would take necessary steps to augment basic pilgrim facilities at Chengannur.
Mr. Padmakumar said that the revenue collection at Sabarimala during the Mandalam pilgrim season was ₹72,02,75,744 on December 15 against ₹123,93,65,560 collected during the same period last year.
New bridge at Pampa
The Devaswom Board chief said that the work on the proposed bridge across the Pampa river, linking Pampa Hilltop with the Ganapati temple premises, would begin soon.
He also said that the board had taken steps to start the bridge work before March 2019.
Mr. Padmakumar said that the Travamcore Devaswom Board would go ahead with legal proceedings against those engaged in misinformation campaign against Aravana prasadom.
The three-member monitoring committee on Sabarimala constituted by the High Court too should intervene in the matter.
Thanka Anki procession
Mr. Padmakumar said that the procession carrying the Thanka Anki, golden attire of the presiding deity, for the Mandalapuja to be performed at Sabarimala on December 27 would set off from Aranmula on December 23.


Four pilgrims get the nod of Kerala High Court-appointed committee
The Kerala Police have sanctioned the travel of four transgender pilgrims to Sabarimala whose controversial detention by law enforcers at Erumely on Sunday had played out in real-time on Facebook live and grabbed significant attention on social media.
In their widely-circulated online narrative, the transgender pilgrims had said the police had shamed them for their gender shift and asked them why they could not go to Sabarimala dressed as men.
On security grounds
The police said they had disallowed the transgender women from proceeding to Sabarimala primarily on the grounds of security.
More than 90,000 people had visited the shrine on Sunday. 
Sabarimala had witnessed several violent protests against the entry of women since the temple opened for Mandala puja on November 15.
The police also were unsure whether the Supreme Court judgment on September 28 allowing the entry of women between the age of 10 and 50 to Sabarimala applied to transgender women.
At the instance of District Police Chief, Kottayam, Hari Shankar, the four petitioned the committee of observers appointed by the Kerala High Court to monitor and take on-the-spot decisions, if necessary, on matters regarding security and administration of Sabarimala. He also promised to investigate the allegation that the police had shamed them.
The transgender pilgrims hailed from Kottayam and Ernakulam districts. They are Ananya, Trupthi, Avanthika, and Ranjumol. They called on Director General, Fire Force, Hemachandran, who is the sole ranking police officer on the three-member committee, and stated their case. The other two members are retired High Court judges.
Panel observation
The committee reportedly ruled that law and temple tradition did not prohibit the entry of transgenders to Sabarimala.
Consequently, the State police told the four that they would safely escort them to the Sannidhanam and back. However, the police said the transgender pilgrims would have to inform of the darshan plans in advance to be given adequate security.
The police also said they could enter sanctum wearing sari if they chose to, and with the traditional “irumudi kettu”.


Over 70,000 cross police checkpost
With six days left for the culmination of the 41-day Mandalam pilgrimage season, Sabarimala continues to witness rush of devotees from different parts of south India.
According to official sources, 70,000 pilgrims crossed the police checkpost at Pampa by 4 p.m. on Friday.
Travancore Devaswom Board president A. Padmakumar said that the pilgrims seldom felt any push and pull at the holy hillock as in the previous years due to the systematic pilgrim management this time around.
As many as 93,000 pilgrims offered prayers at the Ayyappa temple three days ago. 
Thanka Anki procession
He said the customary procession carrying the Thanka Anki (golden attire) of the presiding deity for the Mandalapuja would set off from the Sree Parthasarathy temple at Aranmula on Sunday.
The procession will reach Sabarimala on December 26 and the presiding deity will be adorned with the Thanka Anki prior to the evening deeparadhana. The deity will be adorned with the golden attire prior to the Mandalapuja on December 27.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) State unit’s reported bid to take Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Sabarimala to add vigour to its ongoing agitation against the imposition of ban orders at the Sannidhanam and its precincts is unlikely to take off.
The Prime Minister’s Office is understood to have received a request from the State leaders in this score, but it may not materialise due to logistical issues. Mr. Modi is scheduled to address a rally in Pathanamthitta on January 6 to mark the launch of the party’s Lok Sabha election campaign in the State. It is learnt that there was a move to take Mr. Modi to Sabarimala.
Party sources told The Hindu that making arrangements for Mr. Modi’s visit to Sabarimala when the Makaravilakku festival touches its peak would be quite challenging for the police and other agencies. Crowd control would not be easy and imposing curbs on darshan for pilgrims reaching the temple from neighbouring States would invite their wrath. A visit when the temple opens for monthly pujas would be conducive, sources said.


Lord Ayyappa Temple in Sabarimala has been witnessing a heavy rush as over one lakh pilgrims visited the hill top temple on Friday.
With the annual ‘Mandala Puja’ just days away, the Lord Ayyappa Temple here has been witnessing a heavy rush as over one lakh pilgrims visited the hill top temple on Friday.
A steady inflow of pilgrims was seen at Sabarimala in recent days as the police had eased certain restrictions even as the prohibitory orders are still in place.
“As many as 1,12,260 devotees have visited the shrine and offered prayers on Friday. It is the highest head count after the annual season began this year,” the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB) said in a statement.

The pilgrim rush is expected to increase manifold in the coming days, it said.
However, anxiety looms large in and around the shrine in the backdrop of reports that a group of 50 women, all below the traditionally barred age of 50 years, are set to visit Sabarimala on Sunday under the aegis of ‘Manithi’, a Chennai-based outfit.
Selvy, a member of ‘Manithi’, told a Malayalam TV channel that the group comprised women from different states, including Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Karnataka besides Kerala.
She said they had already written to the office of Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan in this regard and informed about their plan to trek the hill temple.
The police on Saturday confirmed that the women’s group will offer prayers at the Lord Ayyappa temple, which had witnessed intense protest against the implementation of the Supreme Court verdict permitting women of all age groups into the shrine.
“As per the information, the group will reach Kottayam at around 10 am. They have not asked for any special security.

“When they reach Nilackal, the base camp, and if there is any law and order situation, we will deal with it accordingly,” a police official told PTI.
On Friday night, a 43-year-old woman devotee from Andhra Pradesh, who came along with a group of pilgrims to offer prayers at the Ayyappa temple, was stopped and sent back by police midway, citing security reasons.
Marking the culmination of the 41-day ‘vratha’ (penance), Mandala Puja, the first phase of the Sabarimala pilgrimage, would be held on December 27 at the Lord Ayyappa temple.
Kerala had witnessed massive protests by devotees opposing the entry of girls and women in the 10-50 age group into the Sabarimala temple since the Kerala government decided to implement the Supreme Court order.
Over a dozen women have so far made unsuccessful attempts to trek the holy hills.
Four transgenders, who were earlier stopped from proceeding towards the Lord Ayyappa temple citing security reasons, offered prayers at the hill shrine under heavy police security cover earlier this week.
The Kerala High Court had earlier this month appointed a three-member committee, vesting them with powers to oversee law and order and other problems faced by pilgrims during the ongoing annual season.