Sabarimala Verdict: A Timeline of Temple Entry Issue
New Delhi: More than a year after the Supreme Court’s historic Sabarimala verdict in September 2018, the apex court on Thursday referred the review petitions filed against the right of women to enter the temple to a larger bench.
The verdict was delivered by a constitution bench comprising Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices R.F. Nariman, D.Y. Chandrachud, A.M. Khanwalikar and Indu Malhotra. Justices Nariman and Chandrachud dissented with the verdict.
The Wire recaps the chronology of events, beginning in 1990 with a plea in the Kerala high court seeking a ban on the entry of women into Sabarimala until Thursday’s verdict.
1990: S. Mahendran files plea in Kerala high court seeking a ban on women’s entry to the temple.
April 5, 1991: Kerala high court upholds the age-old restriction on women of a certain age-group entering the temple.
August 4, 2006: Indian Young Lawyers Association files plea in Supreme Court seeking to ensure the entry of female devotees between the age group of 10-50 at the Lord Ayappa Temple at Sabarimala.
November 2007: The CPI(M)-led LDF government of Kerala files an affidavit supporting the PIL questioning ban on women’s entry.
January 11, 2016: Two-judge bench of Supreme Court questions practice banning entry of women at the temple.
February 6, 2016: Congress-led UDF government takes U-turn, tells Supreme Court it is duty-bound to “protect the right to practice the religion of these devotees”.
April 11, 2016: Supreme Court says gender justice endangered by the ban on women entering the temple.
April 13, 2016: Supreme Court says tradition cannot justify a ban on women’s entry.
April 21, 2016: Hind Navotthana Pratishtan and Narayanashrama Tapovanam files plea in Supreme Court supporting entry of women.
November 7, 2016: LDF government files a fresh affidavit in the Supreme Court saying it favoured the entry of women of all age groups.
October 13, 2017: Supreme Court refers the case to Constitution bench.
October 27, 2017: Plea filed in Supreme Court for gender-equal bench to hear the case.
Supreme Court. Photo: PTI
July 17, 2018: Five-judge Constitution bench starts hearing the matter.
July 19, 2018: Supreme Court says women have a fundamental right to enter the temple and questioned the rationale behind the age group.
July 24, 2018: Supreme Court made it clear that the ban on entry of women would be tested on “constitutional ethos”.
July 25, 2018: Nair Service Society tells Supreme Court the celibate nature of Sabarimala temple’s presiding deity Lord Ayyappa is protected by the Constitution.
July 26, 2018: The Supreme Court observes it can’t remain oblivious to ban on entry of women as they were barred on “physiological ground” of menstruation.
July 31, 2018: The Supreme Court says constitutional scheme prohibiting exclusion has “some value” in a “vibrant democracy”.
August 1, 2018: The Supreme Court bench of Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra and Justices R.F. Nariman, A.M. Khanwilkar, D.Y. Chandrachud and Indu Malhotra reserves verdict.
September 28, 2018: The Supreme Court, in 4:1 verdict, allows entry of women in Sabarimala temple, says banning females’ entry into the shrine is gender discrimination and the practice violates rights of Hindu women. Justice Indu Malhotra delivers the dissenting judgment.
October 2018: The state government seeks time to implement the verdict. Largescale protests prevent women from entering the temple. Mediapersons attacked, while opposition parties, including the BJP and Congress, begin protests against the state government’s intention to implement the Supreme Court order.
November 2018: Supreme Court agrees to hear review petitions against its verdict.
January 1, 2019: Women of the state form a historic 620-km ‘Women’s Wall‘, a human chain spreading across all 14 districts to “preserve Renaissance values” and promote women’s rights.
January 2, 2019: 96 days after the Supreme Court’s judgment, two women enter the temple. Bindu Hariharan (42), an assistant professor at the School of Legal Studies, University of Kannur, and Kanakadurga (44), a Kerala government employee, were the two women who made history.
January 3, 2019: On a day of massive protests in respone to the entry of the two women, more than 600 people arrested.
February 2019: The Supreme Court reserves its order on the review petition.
November 14, 2019: The apex court referred the review petitions to a larger bench.
Sabarimala, in the Fading Light of Constitutional Values
I read the Supreme Court’s majority judgment on the review petitions against the entry of women of menstruating ages to the temple of Sabarimala in a mood of intense melancholy that can only be described adequately using the word hüzün, which Orhan Pamuk dwells upon in his memoir, Istanbul: Memories and the City.  
My hüzün, however, is for the fading light of the values of the Indian constitution: a resigned sadness about the withering light that does not nevertheless let it slip into the total oblivion of forgetfulness. The Babri Masjid judgment, and now, today’s majority pronouncement on the Sabarimala issue, only deepens the mood – both the melancholy as well as the determination to cling on to the memory of the waning light.
The judgment does not revoke the entry that it granted women of menstruating ages to the temple; it refers it to a bigger bench. This has appeased the highly conservative elements in the Hindutva fold, going by the reactions of the Brahmin-Sudra combine that monopolises the temple now, and the soft-Hindutva political elements that cushion them here. 
These were often groups intent on employing any sort of, and any extent of, violence to perpetuate the exclusion of women there.
That the opening up of the temple has not been struck down is no consolation to me at all. This is because the psychological price we have paid as a society for it has been really too much. 
Around this time last year, we witnessed the worst in all groups that vie for power here. We saw the most egregious gender conservatism surface in the sudra and Hindutva-ised avarna folds of the Malayali hindus and even among many foot-soldiers of the Left parties.
BJP workers pelt stones in Palakkad while protesting the entry of women into Sabarimala. Photo: PTI
We saw empowered, highly educated women insisting that even an 11-year-old who had attained puberty might disturb Ayyappa’s spiritual focus; we heard a female cardiologist based in New York peddle theories of ‘divine energies’ in temples that may unsettle women’s reproductive systems – and saw her get away with it (as far as I know, she has not lost her licence to practice modern medicine). 
During that nightmarish time, women who openly expressed their wish to visit the temple were hunted down, pursued, harassed, harmed, arrested, and subject to the worst trolling. We saw elements on the ‘progressive’ left joining discourse with the right-wing to blame these women; we saw that the leaders of the left lacked imagination, shrewdness, and moral integrity.
 Personally, for me, the most painful part was the way in which progressive ideals – telescoped into the word ‘renaissance’ – were watered down ruthlessly and cynically as a defensive counter-strategy by the left leadership, which ultimately eroded seriously the gains that women had made in terms of a public voice of their own.
Also read: Sabarimala Issue Underscores How the Alt-Right Uses Limits of Liberty to Its Advantage
At the end of it all, leftist women were turned by their men into passive bricks in a ‘wall’ that these men organised supposedly against fascism. We have still not recovered from this loss of voice.  
Was such a price worth paying for a demand that no social group on the left of the political spectrum in Kerala, leave alone the advocates of gender equality, had endorsed widely, and even less, raised? 
Now the Supreme Court’s indecision throws us into the prospect of yet another agonising period. But taking into consideration all that has transpired over the past one year – the incontrovertible truth that majoritarian hubris has taken over most public discourse and institutions – the fall from high-falutin rhetoric about breaking down untouchability in last year’s judgment, to the meek, almost scared, observation about “the power of the court to determine if the constitutional court can interfere in such integral parts of the religion,” is the least-surprising part. 
Over a few years we have seen the guardians of the Indian Constitution – the best educated, the best thinkers of the land – take frequent refuge in deliberately vague formulations and fallacious argumentation, in the hope that this will help them hide their unforgivable lapses against the Indian Constitution and its values. 
 This statement, for example, is not at all clear: what does it imply? That the exclusion of women of menstruating ages on sexualised, insulting grounds is integral to religion? 
What does it refer to – the actual exclusionary practice, or the grounds advanced in its justifications, which vary?
Kanakadurga (left) and Bindu were the first women to enter Sabarimala after the Supreme Court’s verdict. Photo: Reuters
The claim that the resolution of what was a very specific question about a specific practice in a specific place involves consideration of ostensibly similar practices in Islam, Zoroastrianism and so on is a version of the tu quoque fallacy, more precisely, whataboutery.
When I ask you about Sabarimala, you point to Islam etc., deflecting the whole debate. 
This is not just a matter of poor argumentation; it is rather, the unnecessary timidity which leads to convoluted constructions which strive to give the impression that the issue is being properly addressed while it is actually not. 
Also read: Appropriation of Ayyappa Cult: The History and Hinduisation of Sabarimala Temple
But what is perhaps more worrying, beyond just bad argumentation, is that the proposal that all religions should be ridden of gender-based exclusions with a single stroke of a Supreme Court bench might indeed be an evil portent – of the Uniform Civil Code. 
And even worse, assuming that the Supreme Court manages to embark on such a ‘clean-up’, and then what may be realistically expected under present circumstances? The majoritarian hubris that rides over the land rough-shod will punish women who take the Supreme Court seriously, flouting the law without major consequences; the male authority in the minority communities will be relentlessly disarmed and undermined not by minority women, but by the majoritarian state and its lynching-hungry ‘civil society’. Whatever fig-leaf of social peace left in this society will disappear.
The Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala. Photo: PTI
The strategy, then, seems to be this: silently collaborate with the Hindutva effort to reduce Muslims to second-class citizens, and soft-peddle issues that may stoke internal dissension, like women’s rights within the Hindu religion. 
Not a word was uttered it seems about the horrendous violence openly advocated, and practiced, to a considerable extent, against the women who had taken the Supreme Court seriously last year, by these petitioners! 
Instead they have provoked deep and fundamental ‘questions’ about the reach of the Court and the unshakeable nature of ‘integral parts of the religion.’ 
If the Babri Masjid judgment seemed to indirectly condone the destroyers of the Masjid, the ones who had broken the law, this one takes seriously precisely those who had heaped infamy on infamy on the judges who framed last year’s decision. 
We are indeed slipping into darkness. I cling to my hüzün stubbornly. They may leave our eyes blind by killing the light, but hüzün is unaffected. It thrives on the dim but persistent light of memory.
J. Devika is a feminist historian from Kerala.
In 4:1 Verdict, Supreme Court Allows Women's Entry Into Sabarimala Temple
New Delhi: The Supreme Court today ruled that not allowing women in their “menstruating years” into the Sabarimala is ultra vires the constitution, and all women should be allowed to enter the temple.
A 4:1 verdict was delivered by a five-judge constitution bench comprising Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra and Justices R.F. Nariman, A.M. Khanwilkar, D.Y. Chandrachud and Indu Malhotra. The one dissenting opinion on the bench was expressed by Justice Indu Malhotra.
CJI Misra read out his judgment first, on behalf on himself and Justice Khanwilkar. “The dualistic approach against women degrades the status of women,” LiveLaw quoted him as saying. He also stated that the devotees of Ayyappa do not constitute a separate religious denomination.
“Rule 3(b) of 1965 Rules is a clear violation of right of Hindu women to practice religion under Article 25,” Misra ruled. “The right guaranteed under Article 25 has nothing to do with gender or physiological factors.”
“The bar on entry of women between age of 10 and 50 years is not an essential part of the religion,” Bar and Bench quoted the CJI as saying.
Justice Nariman read his concurring judgment next, saying, “There is no protection under Article 26 for Ayyappa devotees and therefore the rules will not apply insofar as Sabarimala is concerned.”
“Rules disallowing women in Sabarimala are unconstitutional and violative of Article 21,” the judge said.
In his concurring judgment, Justice Chandrachud held that “Article 25 protects all persons, it means every individual in the society.”
He held that the Bombay high court judgment in Narasu Appa Mali is not good law when it comes to customs and usages.
Justice Malhotra read her dissenting opinion at the end, saying that the issued raised in the case at hand have impact not just with respect to Sabarimala but other places of worship too, according to Bar and Bench. “Issues of deep religious sentiments should not be ordinarily be interfered by the court,” Live Law quoted her as saying. “The court should not interfere unless if there is any aggrieved person from that section or religion. What constitutes essential religious practice is for the religious community to decide, not for the court.”
“Notions of rationality cannot be brought into matters of religion,” Malhotra said, according to Bar and Bench. “Balance needs to be struck between religious beliefs on one hand and cherished principles of non-discrimination and equality laid down by constitution on the other.”
The apex court was assessing the constitutionality of the Sabarimala custom of excluding women in their ‘menstruating years’. The custom was allowed by Rule 3(b) of the Kerala Hindu Places of Public Worship Act, 1965.
The Indian Young Lawyers Association had filed a public interest litigation challenging this practice. Arguments in the case were heard over eight days beginning July 17, 2018, though the case has been before the Supreme Court since 2006. The state of Kerala had supported the entry of women into the temple, arguing that the “custom” of excluding women violated their rights.
The Travancore Devaswom Board had supported the custom of not allowing women into the temple, saying that temples across the country do not allow women who are menstruating. The Ayyappa Seva Sangham had argued that the court has to find a way to uphold this custom so that other “similar customs” are not disturbed.
Denying Women Entry to the Sabarimala Temple Amounts to Untouchability
The Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala, Kerala, prohibits women of menstruating age (between ten and 50 years of age) from entering it – a prohibition enforced under Rule 3(b) of the Kerala Hindu Places of Public Worship (Authorisation of Entry) Rules, 1965: “Women who are not by custom and usage allowed to enter a place of public worship shall not be entitled to enter or offer worship in any place of public worship.” The Young Lawyers’ Association filed a petition in the Supreme Court challenging this rule in 2006.
After a long hiatus, finally in October 2017, a three-judge bench of the court referred the matter to a constitutional bench, which commenced hearings on the case on July 17, 2018. On Wednesday, the Supreme Court observed that the right of a woman to pray was equal to that of a man, but the hearings were inconclusive. 
One key aspect of the proscription that merits serious constitutional consideration. Article 17 of the constitution provides an unprecedented protection: 
“Abolition of Untouchability: Untouchability is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden The enforcement of any disability arising out of untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.” 
What is “untouchability”? It is a practice based on social humiliation, ideas of pollution and the belief that ascriptive, immutable characteristics are defiling. The people most deeply and inter-generationally affected by the routine, aggravated violence and exclusion that constitute this practice are from the Scheduled Castes or Dalits. Because untouchability provides the logic for structural relations in the caste system, it also spread along the scale of graded inequality, and notably between men and women in the caste order. 
The legal/constitutional understanding, indeed the definition of untouchability, could only be arrived at through a painstaking process of description, legal ethnography and consequent legislative drafting. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and the amendments therein enacted in 2015 are one of two direct illustrations of this constitutional unravelling of Article 17. The definition of ‘atrocity’ has 29 clauses, each delineating a specific form of atrocity, of which three refer specifically to forms of gendered humiliation and violence against women – sexual assault, sexual humiliation and forced temple dedication. The second legislative illustration is Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955.
Caste system built on subjugation of women
It has long been acknowledged that the caste system is powered by specific forms of subjugation of women – within castes and between castes – which impose insurmountable disabilities and entrench the public humiliation of women. B.R. Ambedkar opens up this gendered basis of the caste system in his classic 1917 essay ‘Castes in India’, where he speaks importantly of the systemic, routine and reinforced humiliation of women (of all castes) as the fulcrum on which the perpetuation and reinforcement of the caste system itself rests, citing specifically the examples of Sati, enforced widowhood and pre-pubertal marriage of girls. 
This then must inform our understanding of the reach of Article 17. It applies certainly and irrevocably to untouchability practices in relation to Dalits and Adivasis. But importantly, it also speaks to a whole apparatus of humiliation, violence, exclusion and subjugation applied in very specific ways to women across castes, drawing on caste-based ideologies of purity and pollution. 
When the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam decided to employ women barbers about a decade ago, there was stiff opposition from people citing Hindu scriptures, which hold that women during menstruation are in an unclean state and hence must not touch devotees. Since it is impossible to tell when women are menstruating, the best solution was to bar women from employment as barbers altogether. This proscribes touch and physical or visual contact based on the ideology of the caste-untouchability complex and the enforcement of economic disabilities. 
The guardians of Lord Ayyappa in Sabarimala took this a step further and barred entry of women altogether.
Under the constitution, women have a right to equality before law and the right against discrimination based on sex. To use the ideology of purity and pollution is a violation of the constitutional right against untouchability, i.e Article 17.  It is important to understand the intersectional deployment of pollution practices in Hindu society in order to grasp the full import of Article 17.
In the petition against this rule, the first question framed by the three judge bench for consideration of the constitution bench is “whether the exclusionary practice which is based upon a biological factor exclusive to the female gender amounts to “discrimination” and thereby violates the very core of Articles 14, 15 and 17…?”  
Tirumala temple in Tirupati. Credit: Wikimedia Commons
Not just a violation of equality before law
While this is well taken as the first question to be addressed, the most relevant constitutional provision among the three cited above is Article 17. Women are not banned from temples just because of a “biological factor exclusive to the female gender”. Women are banned because orthodox Hindu texts expound on the multitudinous ways in which women pollute upper-caste environments during their menstrual cycles and after childbirth. Women must be placed outside human, social, physical and visual contact during these periods. The exclusion is an actual proscription of touch and sight. And since it is impossible to regulate menstrual cycles of women devotees, they are banned from temples altogether owing to the actual or potential threat of “pollution”.
This is not, therefore, merely a question of equality before law or discrimination based on gender or biology. It is the gender-specific enforcement of untouchability on Hindu women across caste, with recourse to the scriptural prescriptions on the maintenance of caste order. The laws of Manu notoriously say, “When he has touched a Candala [disposer of a corpse], a menstruating woman, an outcaste, a woman who has just given birth, a corpse . . . he purifies himself by bathing.” And again, “A Candala, a domestic pig, a cock, a dog, a menstruating woman and a eunuch must not look on Brahmans while they are eating.” This is the cornerstone of the practice of untouchability that is quoted today to justify keeping women out of Sabarimala. 
Legacy of human dignity
But as a people, we inherited the legacy of human dignity above all else when we gained independence. And the absolute, non-negotiable rejection of untouchability is the bedrock of that legacy. We have been fighting the practice of untouchability (which is far from gone) using the constitution. Today, the scriptures that propagated untouchability are being quoted to be above the constitution. If menstruation is a defilement, we are back to speaking about ascriptive categories that militate against notions of human dignity guaranteed in the Preamble and reaffirmed by the Supreme Court’s privacy bench. It is important to recognise that untouchability practices implicate women across the ladder of graded inequality in very specific ways, which is why this cannot be construed as just a form of gender based discrimination. It i s entrenched in caste.
With this in view, let us take a more careful look at the question of justification of scriptural and religious traditions of caste-based proscriptions. The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (PCR) is “an Act to prescribe punishment for the [Preaching and Practice of “Untouchability] for the enforcement of any disability arising there from and for matters connected therewith.” Section 2(a) defines civil rights as any right accruing to a person by reason of the abolition of “untouchability” by Article 17 of the constitution; Section 3 of the PCR speaks specifically to the offence of obstructing persons on grounds of untouchability from entering public places of religious worship. 
The most important provision for our present purposes is Explanation II of Section 7 of the PCR, which states that “a person shall be deemed to incite or encourage the practice of ‘untouchability’ (i) if he, directly or indirectly, preaches ‘untouchability’ or its practice in any form; or (ii) if he justifies, whether on historical, philosophical or religious grounds or on the ground of any tradition of the caste system or on any other ground, the practice of ‘untouchability’ in any form (emphasis added)”.
Importantly, this legislation provides a different ground from the Prevention of Atrocities Act, in that it does not delimit the reach of the practice of untouchability, nor does it enumerate its specific forms, recognising only that the ideology of untouchability embedded at the centre of the caste system will perpetrate and reinforce unanticipated and innumerable forms of proscriptions and humiliation. The term ‘untouchability’ is emphasised throughout the legislation, simply to denote a complex of systemic practices that draw their legitimacy from the caste system. The exact systemic practices are not specified, the presumption being that these will be illustrated by empirical facts brought before the court from time to time. The constitutional mandate this legislation serves therefore, if viewed alongside Article 17, is the proscription of untouchability – in whatever form.
Our justice system is based on non-discrimination. The Sabarimala case is not, in my view, a conflict between individual rights and group rights. The singular absolute standard is the prohibition of untouchability in all its forms, whether it affects individuals or groups or indeed classes.
In terms of judicial reasoning, this is a proscription based on the supremacist ideology of caste orders. It is necessary to constructively hold Article 17 in place at the centre, in its intersection with gender (as also with Articles 14, 15 and 21) in order to open out further pathways to constitutional renaissance. To quote from a recent judgement of Chief Justice Dipak Misra, “a constant awakening as regards the text, context, perspective, purpose and the rule of law” is to assert constitutional morality and the dignity of women across castes of a particular faith in this case as an overriding constitutional goal.
Kalpana Kannabiran is professor and director, Council for Social Development, Hyderabad.
Sabarimala: A Guide to the Tricky Issues Facing the Supreme Court
Note: This article was first published September 12, 2018 and is being republished on September 28, 2018 as the Supreme Court will be pronouncing its verdict later in the day.
The Supreme Court’s Sabarimala judgment is expected shortly. This has the potential to be a landmark judgment, as it could set a precedent regarding questions of freedom of religion and equality for years to come.
The apex court is assessing the constitutionality of the Sabarimala custom of excluding women in their ‘menstruating years’. The custom is currently allowed by Rule 3(b) of the Kerala Hindu Places of Public Worship Act, 1965.
What interpretive tools does the Supreme Court have at its disposal? The bench might consider adopting a hands-off, narrow approach. Anticipating public outcry, the court might fear that they are appearing to be subjecting a religious custom to external moral scrutiny. The bench could simply rely on the fact that Rule 3(b) goes beyond what a rule is allowed to do. A rule is supposed to support a legislative Act. Yet Rule 3(b) does the opposite: it supplants the Act it belongs to. This is grounds for striking Rule 3(b) down.
The Supreme Court could equally opt for a more hands-on approach. Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra might see this as a legacy-establishing judgment. One interpretive approach that has gained traction under him is the transformative constitutionalism approach. It imagines the judiciary guiding India towards a more just future. CJI Misra wrote in his Section 377 judgment: “The purpose of having a Constitution is to transform…society.”
If the court relies on this approach, it will likely mean that it will set restrictions – to what extent is hard to predict – on the Sabarimala custom. They would likely not only strike down Rule 3(b) but also provide guarantees to female worshippers – to ensure that their fundamental rights are not infringed upon.
Pilgrims at the Sabarimala temple. Credit: Wikimedia Commons
If the Supreme Court takes a more hands-on approach, the biggest issue it will have to deal with is balancing competing claims to freedom of religion. On one hand, there are the female worshippers, and on the other, the Sabarimala temple and its orthodox followers. On this issue of freedom of religion, the tension between the female worshippers and the Sabarimala temple is two-fold. First, they both claim the individual right to practice faith under Article 25(1) of the constitution. The women argue that access to the temple is essential for practising their faith. The orthodox argue that they cannot practise their faith if women capable of menstruating were allowed entry. Practising celibacy is a core tenet for the followers of Lord Ayyappa, a Naishtika Brahmachari. And the orthodox believe that menstruating women are not celibate, though the connection between menstruation and celibacy is tenuous.
Second, there exists a tension between the female worshippers and the Sabarimala temple as an institution. The temple has the denominational right to manage its internal religious affairs under Article 26(b). Its denominational right is not boundless, however. It is subject to the state’s religious reform mandate under Article 25(2)(b). The state can make laws to open up Hindu places of worship to all ‘sections and classes’.
The Supreme Court will have to carefully balance this interplay between an individual’s right to faith, a temple’s right to manage its affairs and the state’s religious reform mandate. For the sake of brevity, let us take look at just one of these components. It will give us a sense of the complexity of the task the SC is faced with.
Can a denomination’s right to manage its religious customs override an individual’s right to practice faith? The Kerala high court, in 1991, said yes.Using a literal reading of the constitution, they observed an individual right to faith under Article 25 is subject to other fundamental rights, including the denominational right under Article 26(b). Article 26(b), on the other hand, is not explicitly subject to other fundamental rights.
In privileging a group’s right over an individual’s, the Supreme Court failed to understand who the constitution is intended for, namely the individual.
We believe the Kerala high court was mistaken. In privileging a group’s right over an individual’s, it failed to understand who the constitution is intended for, namely the individual. The constitution takes the individual as its unit. Group rights are a means to better safeguard individual rights. Group rights are to be applied outwards, to protect groups from state interference. For example, they can be applied to protect religious groups from financial regulation or from land grabs. Group rights, such as the right to manage religious affairs, ought not to be applied inwards, to chokehold the fundamental rights of a group’s members. Article 26, which grants religious denominations many of its rights, subjects denominations to constitutional ‘morality’. Surely, constitutional morality includes the guarantee of fundamental rights to individual citizens. We need to ask ourselves: do group rights even make sense in the absence of individual rights?
The apex court might hesitate to directly rule that the Sabarimala temple, in exercising its denominational rights, has violated the individual rights of female worshippers. In doing so, the court could be seen as capriciously subjecting the Sabarimala temple to external moral standards. One interesting option for the Supreme Court is to simply rule that the temple is a sub-sect of Hinduism. Hindu denominations are by definition subject to the state’s religious reform mandate, under Article 25(2)(b). Lawyers for the temple have argued that it is a non-Hindu denomination. But given the temple’s obvious roots in Hinduism, this is a difficult argument to make. They have relied on the fact that there are non-Hindu followers of Lord Ayyappa. But the Supreme Court could easily rule that this alone is not sufficient for gaining non-Hindu denominational status, drawing an analogy to Sufism, which remains a sub-sect of Islam despite having non-Muslim followers.
How the judges deal with each of the major issues in this case has the potential to shape its freedom of religion and equality jurisprudence for years to come.
This case is extremely nuanced. We hope the judges don’t shy away from the challenge.
Satya Prasoon and Jai Brunner are with the Centre for Law and Policy Research where they are associated with the Supreme Court Observer project.
Sabrimala: SC Asks Senior Lawyers to Deliberate Upon Discrimination Against Women in Related Issues
New Delhi:  The Supreme Court on Monday asked four senior lawyers to convene a meeting on January 17 to decide on the issues to be deliberated by it in the matter relating to discrimination against women in various religions and at religious places including Kerala’s Sabarimala temple.
The top court however made it clear at the outset that it was not considering review pleas in the Sabarimala case.
“We are not hearing review pleas of Sabarimala case. We are considering issues referred to by a five-judge bench earlier,” said a nine-judge constitution bench, headed by Chief Justice S.A. Bobde.
The bench said it will consider listing the petitions related to entry of Muslim women into mosques, female genital mutilation in the Dawoodi Bohra Muslim community and barring of Parsi women, married to non-Parsi men, from the holy fireplace at Agiary.
It said the apex court secretary general will coordinate with the four senior advocates, including solicitor general Tushar Mehta and A.M. Singhvi, in thrashing out issues to be dealt by it.
The lawyers will decide whether the several issues referred to it by an earlier bench on November 14 last year needed to be re-framed, it said.
The meeting should also deal with the time to be allotted to each lawyer for advancing arguments in the case, it added.
The bench said the lawyers should decide as to who will address which issue and fixed the matter for further hearing after three weeks.
“We will grant three weeks time for this (deciding the issues) and we will put this matter after that for hearing,” it further said.
The bench said it will not go into the specific details of each case like Sabarimala temple matter and would strictly go by the reference order of November 14 in deciding the scope of judicial intervention in matters of religious issues.
While referring the matter to a larger bench, the five-judge bench had said that the debate about the constitutional validity of religious practices like the bar on entry of women and girls into a place of worship was not limited to the Sabarimala case.
It had said such restrictions are there with regard to the entry of Muslim women into mosques and ‘dargahs’ and Parsi women, married to non-Parsi men, being barred from the holy fireplace of an Agiary.
It set out seven questions of law to be examined by the larger bench. They included — interplay between freedom of religion under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution; need to delineate the expression ‘constitutional morality’; the extent to which courts can enquire into particular religious practices; meaning of sections of Hindus under Article 25 and whether ‘essential religious practices’ of denomination or a section thereof are protected under Article 26.
While the five-judge bench unanimously agreed to refer religious issues to a larger bench, it gave a 3:2 split decision on petitions seeking a review of the apex court’s September 2018 decision allowing women of all ages to enter the Sabarimala shrine in Kerala.
A majority verdict by then Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices A.M. Khanwilkar and Indu Malhotra decided to keep pending pleas seeking a review of its decision regarding entry of women into the shrine, and said restrictions on women in religious places was not restricted to Sabarimala alone and was prevalent in other religions as well.
The minority verdict by Justices R.F. Nariman and D.Y. Chandrachud gave a dissenting view by dismissing all review pleas and directing compliance of its September 28 decision.
The split decision came on 65 petitions – 56 review petitions, four fresh writ petitions and five transfer pleas – which were filed after the apex court verdict of September 28, 2018 sparked violent protests in Kerala.
By a majority 4:1 verdict, the apex court had lifted the ban that prevented women and girls between the age of 10 and 50 from entering the famous Ayyappa shrine in Kerala and held that the centuries-old Hindu religious practice was illegal and unconstitutional.
Sabarimala: 'Deity's Will' Cannot Trump the Constitution on Right to Equality
Ambedkar opposed temple entry as a goal for the depressed classes (Dalits), when Mahatma Gandhi approached him for supporting the passage of the temple entry bills mooted by C.S. Ranga Iyer and P. Subbarayan in the Central and Madras legislatures, respectively. And in 1933, he wrote why:
Is temple entry to be the final goal of the advancement in the social status of the Depressed Classes in the Hindu fold? Or is it only the first step, and if it is the first step, what is the ultimate goal? Temple entry as a final goal, the Depressed Classes can never support…
What the Depressed Classes want is a religion, which will give them equality of social status…they have made up their mind not to tolerate a religion that will lend its support to the continuance of these inequalities….If the Hindu religion is to be their religion, then it must become a religion of Social Equality (emphasis added).
The Depressed Classes can say that they are Hindus only if the theory of Chaturvarna and Caste system is abandoned and expunged from the Hindu shastras. Do the Mahatma and the Hindu reformers accept this as their goal and will they show the courage to work for it?
Ambedkar’s words are most instructive and carry the same weight now as they did then, as the controversial case of Sabarimala temple entry for all women plays out in the Supreme Court and passions rage in a country divided on the plank of tradition.
The norm of social equality – whether for Dalits, or women and men, of all ages – is what this country was built on after Independence from the British. What use have we of religion that cannot respect that all human beings, at all times, are equal? Indeed, what use does God have, of such religion?
In spirit, the question of lifting a ban on the entry of women, whether menstruating or not, into any temple or religious place of worship in a democracy as ours, should be as open and shut as whether Dalits should have been allowed to drink at the Chavdar Tank at Mahad, Maharashtra.
But the supporters of the ban in question – traditionalists, the Hindu Right wing and what-have-you on social media – have brought in tradition, custom, mythology, other religions and so on, to justify why the status quo should not go. In court, all these have, so far, conflated to the broad argument that the practice should remain, because it has been around for ages and because it is ‘essential’ to the temple’s and the presiding deity Lord Ayyappa’s identity (and, to stretch it a bit, the deity’s own freedom). They deny it has anything to do with gender-based discrimination and argue how young women are allowed in the temple, in fact, at certain times, and women of certain ages, at all times.
The legal responses are being articulated by the Indian Young Lawyers Association, petitioners to the case in the Supreme Court and in many articles being written by expert lawyers on this matter.
One of the latest arguments on the respondents’ side reminds us that Lord Ayyappa himself is a “juristic person”, with fundamental rights (and duties – of which no reference is made) under the Indian Constitution. This recognition, argues advocate J. Sai Deepak, representing People for Dharma (intervenor in the case), goes back to a 1925 judgment of the Bombay high court in Pramatha Nath Mullick vs Pradyumna Kumar Mullick (27 BOMLR 1064).
He also quotes from the judgment of the Kerala high court in the S. Mahendran  vs The Secretary, Travancore Devaswom Board, Thiruvananthapuram and Ors. (1991), to shed light on how the thanthri (head priest) alone, acting as the shebait (or manager of sorts) and not the Dewaswom Board, has unequivocal powers in deciding religious practices and rituals, including matters of controversy:
There were instances where thanthries also were unable to take a decision pertaining to some religious practices and in such cases the thanthri used to suggest that it can be resolved by a Devaprasnam….
The report of the Devaprasnam conducted in 1985 (from 5-4-1985 to 8-4-1985 by well-known astrologers) was exhibited as ext. clause that is a Devaswom publication, the authenticity of which is not in dispute. The English translation of the relevant portion contained at page 7 of the original report reads as follows:
“It is seen that the deity does not like young ladies entering the precincts of the temple.”(emphasis added).
And finally, he argues that
A temple even if it a public place of worship does not lose its status as the abode of the deity…
Therefore, it is the will of the deity expressed in the form of tradition that shall apply to the conduct of devotees once they enter the temple and not the free will of the devotees who have no regard for the traditions of the temple and the beliefs underlying such traditions. The rights of the deity as the master of his abode have been recognised by this Court in several judgments. Therefore, the limited consequence of the public character of the temple, is to allow access to all Hindus who abide by the rules of the owner of the abode, namely the deity.
These arguments are compelling in court, but they leave open the question – do non-natural juristic persons (such as corporates, idols, robots etc.) hold inalienable rights? In other words, was it the intent of the Constitution that human rights would be meant only for humans? If juristic persons who are not natural persons (such as the Lord Ayyappa idol) also held such rights, then could there be limits on to what extent and vis-à-vis the inalienable rights of sentient human beings of breath and life?
Second, what if, taking strength from this line of reasoning, religious institutions begin to justify the practice of casteism and other forms of discrimination, stating it is the “will of the diety,” conveyed by whisperings to the head priest (invariably, a male Brahmin)?
One could also turn this around on its head and ask – where was the will of deities in different temples in Travancore considered, when in 1936, Maharaja Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma abolished overnight the practice of caste-based ban on temple entry prevalent for ages?
It is interesting that the Maharaja’s proclamation was preceded by attempts such as a Temple Entry Enquiry Committee set up by the Travancore government in 1932, which noted:
To sum up the position, the courts have treated the rights of the savarnas to keep avarnas
out of their temples according to their faith to save them from pollution, as a civil right capable of adjudication in a court of law. On the merits, they have held that, according to long standing usage and religious authority (emphasis added), the avarnas have no right to enter the temples and that they are entitled to offer worship only from the position outside the temples assigned to them by usage.
Clearly, this is an exact similar line of reasoning being thrown by those arguing for the continuation of the ban in the Sabarimala case!
The report of the Temple Entry Committee that refrained from suggesting any radical reforms did not make much headway. Yet, history shows us that the argument of “long standing usage and religious authority” did not deter the Maharaja with declaring his famous proclamation which, in one fell swoop, threw open temple gates to all castes. The Temple Entry Proclamation of November 12, 1936 reads,
Profoundly convinced of the truth and validity of our religion, believing that it is based on divine guidance and on all-comprehending toleration, knowing that in its practice, it has, throughout the centuries, adapted itself to the needs of changing times, solicitous that none of our Hindu subjects should, by reasons of birth or caste or community be denied the consolations and solace of the Hindu faith, we have decided and hereby declare, ordain and command that, subject to such rules and conditions as may be laid down and imposed by us for preserving their proper atmosphere and maintaining their rituals and observances (emphasis added), there should henceforth be no restriction placed on any Hindu by birth or religion on entering or worshipping at the temple controlled by us and our Government.
What is less talked of, however, are these very rules that were proclaimed 12 days later by the same Maharaja, retaining restrictions on temple entry “on certain occasions, in consonance with the prevailing custom and usage.”
One of these regulations (No. 6) proclaimed on November 24, 1936 said, “persons who are not Hindus, those who are under pollution due to birth or death in their families, women at such times during which they are not, by customs and usage, allowed to enter temples (emphasis added), professional beggars, drunk/disorderly persons, and persons suffering from contagious diseases were not allowed to enter the temples…”
Thus, what is hailed as one of Kerala’s stunning reforms, could still not manage to strike at the core of Manusmriti. In fact, one may see the seeds sown here for Rule 3 (b) of the Kerala Hindu Places of Public Worship (Authorisation of Entry) Rules, 1965, which is now being hotly debated in the present Sabarimala case.
Is it sheer coincidence that in the history of temple entry in India, only men have ruled on who can enter temples, when and how? Why should such things be decided on the good faith or lack of it of a dominant class/group that holds power over another, one way or the other? Even that, is a tradition, that cannot be justified on grounds that it cannot be changed, only because it is one.
In the specific case, why is it that despite the Sabarimala temple exulting in the fact that it allows devotees from all castes to offer their prayers, the post of the head thanthri is still the stranglehold of male brahmins, and that too, despite the Kerala government taking the bold step to break this tradition? Was that also the “will of the deity”, prevailing over everything else, and can be easily upheld in courts?
In case one fails to see the connection between these questions, let us once again turn back to Ambedkar, who reminded us that subjugation of women was the lynchpin on which the wheels of caste turned and still do.
And that brings us back to Ambedkar’s question on temple entry, which is – what is the final goal?
Would the unrestricted entry into Sabarimala temple, if upheld, consolidate into a bigger movement for women’s rights, shaking the roots of discriminatory practices against women in all religions, or would it simply mean more women adhering to the strictures of Hinduism that essentially remain rooted in caste and gender oppression?
That is a more fundamental question that those on the side of the petitioners and respondents alike, may wish to dwell upon.
(Sowmya Sivakumar is an independent writer based in Tamil Nadu)
Appropriation of Ayyappa Cult: The History and Hinduisation of Sabarimala Temple
The issue of restrictions on entry of women between the ages of 10 and 50 in Sabarimala Ayyappa temple has been a topic of national debate for quite some time. Now, with the Supreme Court’s verdict lifting these restrictions, the issue has once again attained national attention. In Kerala, right-wing Hindu groups have been orchestrating demonstrations and different campaigns of Hindu mobilisation against the Supreme Court verdict in the name of protecting a centuries old custom. Barring the ruling left-led coalition, opposition parties like Congress and BJP are also agitating.
In this article, a historical investigation is attempted examining the evolution of Sabarimala Ayyappa cult, the custom of restricting women’s entry and the appropriation of the cult or the Hinduisation of this temple.
Ayyappa cult: locating a heterogeneous history
The history of Sabarimala and the Ayyappa deity is shrouded in mystery. The scholar Radhika Sekar in her book The Sabarimala Pilgrimage and Ayyappan Cultus says the myth and legends of Ayyappa are not found in any of the major Puranic texts. The cult is traditionally not found in the northern parts of India. “Ayyappa worship is not known further north than mid-Karnataka, where it was probably introduced from Kerala”, observes M.N. Srinivas in the book Religion and Society among the Coorgs of South India.
Also Read: The Politics of Sabarimala in the Aftermath of the SC Verdict
Due to the significant non-presence of god Ayyappa in the conventional Ithihasa-Purana texts, it becomes difficult to categorise the cult as strictly belonging to Hindu tantric modality. It is after eighth century AD, with the coming of Brahmin migrants, that the Hindu temples of Ithihasa-Purana tradition started to be built in Kerala. Most of the temples were in the wetland areas. One of the most notable things is that the Sabarimala Ayyappa temple does not find much mention in historical records of ancient Kerala, as Thikkurissi Ganghadaran says in his chapter of the book Kerala Samskara Padanangal.
On the other hand, non-Brahmin influences on the historical evolution of Sabarimala could be located. The relationship between the horseman god Ayyanar of Tamil Nadu and Ayyappa of Sabarimala is one such influence. As T.A. Gopinatha Rao observes in Elements of Hindu Iconography, “Ayyanar is basically a village tutelary deity, worshipped by the lower castes. There are iconographical similarities between the two deities and etymologically too it appears to be feasible.”
In ‘Ayyanarvillupattu’ (traditional Ayyanar Tamil songs), Ayyanar’s lieutenant Karuppuswami has also been eulogised and praised lavishly. Ayyanar’s temples are usually accompanied by Karuppuswami temples nearby.
The cult is traditionally not found in the northern parts of India.
According to historian A. Sreedhara Menon, Sabarimala history is has more to do with Buddhism than with Brahmanism. “Ayyappa devotees strictly follow non-violence, vegetarianism and abstention from sex during the two months before the pilgrimage. It resembles the Ahimsa principles practiced by Buddhists”, Menon says.
For some scholars, Ayyappa is Nilakantha Avalokiteswara depicted in the Buddhist Puranas. “It has been mentioned in the Buddhist Puranas that the temple of Nilakantha Avalokiteswara was erected somewhere in the Sahya mountains,” M. Sreekala Nair writes in her chapter of Introduction to Kerala Studies. The posture of Ayyappa closely resembles the meditating stature of Buddha.
Another uniqueness of the temple is the presence of Vavar (a Muslim deity) in its premises. Some Christian influences could also be identified. Sabarimala pilgrims visit Arthunkal church, where thousands of them return their malas (string of beads). This is another example for the mixed religious culture. From this heterogeneous identity, the Sabarimala space witnessed a transformation into the Brahmanic fold of Hinduism, especially in the twentieth century.
Hindu pilgrims queue outside the Sabarimala Temple to offer prayers to the Hindu deity “Ayappa”, about 70 km west of the townPathanamthtta in Kerala, on January 15, 2003. Credit: Reuters/Dipak Kumar/Files
‘Desecration of the Temple’, the historical turning point
The most significant turning point in the process of Hinduisation is the Sabarimala arson case of 1950. “The Santhikkaran (priest) who went to the temple on June 14 found the Sreekovil (Sanctum Sanctorum), the Mandapam (Temple Porch) and the store room destroyed by fire and the idol partly damaged.” It was portrayed not as an accident, but as a deliberate attempt to ravage the temple.
Also Read: Kerala Opposition Parties Want Sabarimala Temple to Continue Bar on Women From Entering
Hindu Mahamandal, an organisation working for ‘Hindu unity’ called for a hartal (strike) in Thiruvananthapuram city on July 1. A ceremony to re-install the idol and purify the temple was was conducted on June 25, 1950 with strong religious appeal to all Hindus. Under the leadership of Akhila Bhartha Ayyappa Seva Sangam, an ‘Ayyappa Jyothi’ was ceremoniously taken around Kerala and Tamil Nadu by the devotees for the first time to generate public awareness, interest and involvement in the temple’s reconstruction.
The temple has undergone significant ritual changes after the 1950 incident. One such significant change is the restriction on entry of women. The ban was enforced under Rule 3(b) of the Kerala Hindu Places of Public Worship (Authorisation of Entry) Rules, 1965.
The notion that this is a recent restriction finds resonance in the Kerala high court’s judgment. “Women used to visit the temple earlier. The Maharaja of Travancore accompanied by the Maharani (queen) and the Diwan had visited the temple in the Malayalam year of 1115 (1940). There was thus no strict prohibition for women to enter the Sabarimala temple in olden days,” the judgment read. “Both women below the age of menstruation and above the age of menstruation belong to the Sabarimala pilgrims. Nowadays women belonging to menstruating age are also pilgrim to Sabarimala,” says Kurumalur Narayana Pillai about 1940s in the book Sreebhoothanadha Sarvaswam.
Another important change that took place was the incorporation of ‘Harivarasanam’ (Sanskrit official lullaby of Ayyappa) as the official song of Ayyappa and Sabarimala. This song was incorporated as the official song after the firing of the temple in 1950.
Makaravilakku (ritual festival of Sabarimala) is one of the most important attractions in Sabarimala. It is during this period that the most number of pilgrims reach Sabarimala. This is because of the ‘magical’ and ‘divine’ happening called Makarajyothi (celestial star appear in the month of Makaram). Facts categorically establish that the divine Jyothi that gives Sabarimala pilgrimage a magnetic attraction among the millions of Hindus is man-made. Even the newspapers like the Malayala Rajyam and The Hindu, which reported the Sabarimala temple arson in detail in the months of June and July of 1950, didn’t carry any specific report on Makaravilakku phenomenon.
Former president of Tranvancore Devaswom Board Raman Nair has admitted that “the Makaravilakku is also done with the help of the police and other people”. In a letter the ombudsman for the Travancore and Cochin Devaswom Boards, Nalinakshan Nair said that Makarajyothi has a history of 45 years only.
Nilakkal movement and Hindu mobilisation
The Hindu mobilisation generally called Nilakkal movement in the year of 1983 was an important episode in the Hinduisation process associated with Sabarimala. The Christian-oriented newspaper Deepika Daily, on March 25, 1983 reported that a granite cross was discovered by some workers from the government owned farming corporation land at Nilakkal. The place was 21 kilometres away from Sabarimala. Stories spread that the discovered cross was that of St. Thomas’s period. Devotees poured into the place. Religious practices began to be conducted. It irked the Hindu organisations and community leaders.
Subsequently Nilakkal became a site of religious confrontation for months. The movement saw an unprecedented Hindu mobilisation in Kerala. The uniqueness of this mobilisation was that it was not based upon ‘protecting’ Nilakkal Mahadevar temple from ‘Christian threat’ as a church was going to be built near it. Instead, the attempt to build the church was portrayed as a threat against Sabarimala, which was 21 km away. The convention of different Hindu organisations urged Hindus to observe April 30 as ‘Nilakkal day’ demanding the removal of the temporary construction at the Nilakkal premise.
The Hindu mobilisation generally called Nilakkal movement in the year of 1983 was an important episode in the Hinduisation process associated with Sabarimala.
On April 28, 1983, the Kerala government made public its decision to remove the cross and temporary shed from the close vicinity of Nilakkal Mahadevar temple. It was also decided to allot land in some other place for building the church at Nilakkal. Hindu organizations rejected this decision.
Posturing the issue as an attack against Sabarimala greatly helped unite large number of Ayyappa devotees and Hindu devotees. The place allotted for Nilakkal church by the government was 325 metres away from the Nilakkal temple. On the evening of May 28, 1983, at around 4 pm, a black color cross with a crucified Christ was installed in a newly built stone altar.
Also Read: Denying Women Entry to the Sabarimala Temple Amounts to Untouchability
This opened up the next stage of the Hindu mobilisation. On June 4, a protest rally of swamis and others marched towards the church site. It resulted in a violent clash between police and the protesters. As the situation was getting worse and direct communal confrontation was ready to begin, the church authorities made it clear that “they don’t have any intention to build the Church forcefully at the cost of religious fraternity that is as precious as the Apple of the eye”. Sarvodaya leader M.P. Manmadan’s mediation proposals were accepted by both Christian Church Action council and Nilakkal Action Council and the religious tension solved.
Pilgrimage and the process of Hinduisation
The pilgrimage to Sabarimala plays a crucial role in the phenomenon and process of Hinduisation. The Sabarimala pilgrimage could be easily fitted into eminent anthropologist Victor Turner’s category of Communitas. In the entire process of pilgrimage a new community or communitas of swami or Ayyappans emerge. The pilgrims transcend their caste, class and other hierarchies and tend to assume a new egalitarian identity of swami or Ayyappan.
Pilgrimage brings a feeling of unity and fraternity as Hindus among the pilgrims transcending the boundaries of caste. Here, Sabarimala pilgrimage and the image of Ayyappa act as the unifying force of an otherwise caste divided society. Though the communitas of swamis or Ayyappans is a temporary phenomenon, it has long term repercussions and constituent role in the larger and long term process of Hinduisation. The communitas give birth to a collectivity that is active in other religious activities too. This does not stop with the Sabarimala pilgrimage season. Instead, at a micro level, the members of this pilgrimage communitas are the main actors associated with other Hindu religious activities.
In all the stages of pilgrimage, we witness a clear cut Hindu collectivity. In the growth and popularity of the Ayyappa cult and Sabarimala pilgrimage, the Akhila Bharatha Ayyappa Seva Sangham (ABASS), a voluntary organisation plays a crucial role. It has succeeded in orchestrating a targeted pilgrimage of Hindus to Sabarimala from all parts of the world. Hence, more than a spiritual urge the pilgrimage assumes a targeted character of Hindu mobilisation.
All these things points that organised Hindutva efforts have played a crucial role in the transformation of Sabarimala as a exclusive Hindu masculine space. The present agitation also clearly shows the organised efforts of Hindu mobilisation in the name of Sabarimala.
Jitheesh P.M. is a fellow at Tricontinental Institute for Social Research.
Sabarimala Temple Case: Should Regressive Religious Arguments Be Constitutionally Protected?
Sabarimala temple. Credit: PTI
A constitution bench of the Supreme Court will examine the controversial question whether women should be able to enter the Sabarimala temple. The problem presents complex issues of religious freedom, gender equality and female autonomy. Though much has been said about the controversy, some substantial questions remain unaddressed.
Reasoning with religion 
Religious authorities make the obvious argument by relying on Article 26 of the constitution that every religious denomination has the fundamental right to manage religious affairs. They argue that interference by the state in matters wholly religious such as temple entry will infringe their rights. They further assert that faith cannot be subjected to the test of logic and reason.
However, this is a susceptible claim. Like every other right, the right to manage religious affairs is not absolute, but limited. Article 26 itself provides the inherent limitations of ‘public order, morality and health’ to this freedom of management. Moreover, courts in India have always assessed religion and its practices in the light of other equally important constitutional rights. For instance, in Church Of God (Full Gospel) v. K.K.R. Majestic Colony Welfare Association and Others (2000), the Supreme Court was confronted with the question of whether noise pollution caused by the use of loudspeakers by religious denominations is entitled to the protection of the right to religious freedom. The court rightly said that these religious rights can only exist in harmony with other equally important constitutional rights and that “the state has to step in to set right the imbalance between competing interests.”
To understand how this balance often manifests, let us assume for a moment that there is a religious denomination having human sacrifice as its religious practice. It is asserted that the practice forms an essential and inviolable part of their religion. Such a tradition, no doubt, will be held impermissible, being offensive and threatening to human life. Even though the implication is comparatively smaller in the case of temple entry prohibition, it will be difficult for one to hold that religious freedom must give way to the right to life, but not to the right to equality.
The prohibition on the entry of women in Sabarimala is based on discrimination against menstruating women. It specifically targets an entire section of the population by relying on outdated and sexist notions of purity and impurity. It perpetuates prejudice on a systematic and widespread manner and is prima facie unsustainable being violative of Article 14 of the constitution.
The book club analogy
Another argument is often made to support religious exclusivity in the matter of temple administration. It is said that temples could be compared to private book clubs or restaurants serving specific kind of cuisine. A men’s book club cannot be said to be discriminatory against women and a vegetarian restaurant is not being unfair to a non-vegetarian, it is contended. This analogy, however intuitively attractive, is misplaced.
The prohibition on the entry of women in Sabarimala is based on discrimination against menstruating women. Credit: Reuters
Indian constitution has a peculiar form of secularism emerging from its unique socio-cultural context. The provision in Article 25 of ‘throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus’ perhaps has no other parallel in any other constitution in the world. The country has struggled through targeted discrimination based on caste and sex in the matter of entry and access to religious institutions. The constitutional provision under Article 25, therefore, has the character of attempting to redress a historical inequality.
Moreover, the importance of ‘public’ character of temples as different from private book clubs or restaurants cannot be trivialised. The public nature of temples changes the balance altogether in favour of the excluded individual or class. The owner of a private restaurant might be able to limit the access to her place of business, but the entity of state is bound to adhere to the constitutional norms in the matter of access to public spaces. Going by what the Bombay high court emphatically held in the context of entry of women in the inner sanctum of the dargah in the Haji Ali Dargah case (2016), the state is under a positive constitutional obligation to ensure that there is no gender discrimination.
Cultural norms  
Another claim made on behalf of the religious authorities is that no woman has approached the court wishing to enter the Sabarimala temple. It is also said that even if the court rules in favour of women entry, Indian women will continue to respect the religious customs and restrict themselves from Sabarimala. This argument is misconceived. Historically, legal reforms usually precede socio-political change. Legal abolition of several antiquated practices such as Sati or untouchability did not witness a social transformation overnight. Law very often stimulates a corresponding socio-cultural evolution. Moreover, the consideration of the court in the Sabarimala case should not be whether women are willing to enter the Sabarimala temple despite a legal ruling. The initial hesitation could be sourced to patriarchal and sexist notions of how women should and should not behave. Constitutional courts, on the other hand, must concern themselves with the infraction of her fundamental rights, in this case, the right to equality and the right to freedom of religion and worship.
One may recall that arguments based on the antiquity of custom were earlier raised to fence out Dalits from places of worship. In fact, the Sabarimala episode might occasion a historic opportunity to examine if the regressive arguments associated with archaic religious practices are worthy of constitutional protection.
The Politics of Sabarimala in the Aftermath of the SC Verdict
The landmark verdict of the Supreme Court on Sabarimala, allowing the entry of women of all age groups to the temple, has set off a chain reaction in Kerala. Although the verdict was largely along expected lines, it was met with sporadic protests by Ayyappa devotees in the state. The furore was expected to die down but has since been hijacked by Hindutva outfits. In a clear volte-face from their stated position, the BJP (and its feeder organisations) have been mobilising people across the state against the implementation of the apex court order. The state unit of the Congress too has taken a position against the judgement and its implementation.
Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan. Credit: PTI
Meanwhile, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan tried to reach out to the principal players – the Tanthri (head priest) family and the Pandalam palace, closely linked to the legend of the deity – but they chose to snub his offer of talks on account of the government’s statement that the agenda of the meeting would be to chart out a path to implement the apex court order.
Following the snub, the chief minister held a detailed press conference on Monday where he explained the state government’s position at length. He took the Congress to task for their regressive stand and held the BJP and RSS responsible for fishing in troubled waters. 
The chief minister held forth on how his government’s (and the CPI(M)’s stand) on the issue was consistent since the V.S. Achuthananthan government submitted its first affidavit as a respondent in the case in 2007. 
But crucially, he didn’t explain the change of stance of the Travancore Devaswom board – a statutory body entrusted with the task of administering temples in the state.
Also read: In 4:1 Verdict, Supreme Court Allows Women’s Entry Into Sabarimala Temple
As one of the respondents in the Supreme Court, the Travancore Devaswom Board had taken a starkly different position from the Pinarayi Vijayan government as an autonomous body vested with the protection of customs, traditions and rituals of temples under their administration. A series of conflicting statements given to the press in the aftermath of the verdict by Travancore Devaswom Board president A. Padmakumar – a nominee of the Marxist party and a former MLA to boot – indicated that he was under pressure from the government to take a stand supportive of the government’s. 
In the immediate aftermath of the verdict, the Devaswom Board president had hinted at filing a review petition against the landmark verdict. But following a public reprimand from the chief minister, the Devaswom Board president began to sing a different tune. Even before the Devaswom Board formally met to take a call on the filing of the review petition, Padmakumar clearly stated that the board would “take a decision in conjunction with the decision of the state government”. It was clearly interpreted as a sign of arm-twisting of the autonomous temple authority by the chief minister.
Sabarimala temple. Credit: Wikimedia Commons
As chief minister, Pinarayi Vijayan has an iron-grip on the government and is used to complete subordination from his state Comrades in the party. However, this instance of the president of a statutory temple body being subjected to coercion playing out in the public left a section of the devotees clearly aggrieved. More so, the Devaswom Board’s meeting to make their decision official was rendered a ceremonial exercise in the bargain. And that is when the state government lost control of the narrative. Finally, when the government reached out to the stakeholders to find an amicable solution to the stalemate, it was too late to salvage things. 
A senior minister in Vijayan’s government countered this assertion when The Wire got in touch with him: “You press people would have dubbed it double standards and hypocrisy if the Devaswom Board had gone for a review. It is like the Aesop fable of the ‘Father, Son and the Donkey’. We would be damned either way”. The minister did not comment on what compelled the Devaswom Board to deviate from their initial position though.
It seems the state government has overplayed its hand in assuming that the general public would stand by it. But a perceived soft stand on minority issues of late – the government’s reaction on the Munnar cross demolition on encroached land and the inordinate delay in Bishop Franco’s arrest being a couple of them – might have annoyed a section of the majority community. 
While the BJP had outsourced demonstrations and protests to their feeder organisations in the first couple of days following the verdict, they couldn’t let such a golden opportunity slip. The state BJP President P.S Sreedharan Pillai had employed verbal gymnastics to speak disingenuously on the verdict as the RSS position on the issue in 2016 had made it incumbent on them to support the court’s decision. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh later issued a clarification by releasing another disingenuous statement on Sabarimala following the verdict. Reached out for a comment, Kerala BJP general secretary K. Surendran – who had deleted his earlier Facebook post supporting the entry of women of all age groups – contended: “We had never welcomed the Supreme Court verdict on Sabarimala. It is vested interests in the media that twisted our statements to make it sound as if we had taken a volte-face”. Asked to elaborate on his own U-Turn, he attributed it to his party’s stand.
The Congress’ strategy seems to be devised to prevent further erosion of Hindu votes from their kitty. Having already lost a large chunk of the Nair votes to the BJP, they took a call well before the BJP to oppose the verdict in solidarity with the devotees. The blatantly regressive statements on menstruating women by Congress working president K. Sudhakaran and general secretary K.P. Anilkumar have not gone down well. But the Congress has always engaged in such appeasement politics in the state and their stand doesn’t surprise seasoned political observers. But the party has ruled out hitting the streets in protest and instead vowed to protest by peaceful means.
Also read: Sabarimala: A Guide to the Tricky Issues Facing the Supreme Court
Mahila Congress state president Lathika Subhash said: “I fully back the decision of the state leadership. Moreover, I am an Ayyappa devotee and I have visited Sabarimala on more than one occasion. I don’t see any contradiction in my stand as a woman and a politician as customs and traditions are associated with the sentiments of people and faith a subjective matter.” 
It isn’t clear whether the Congress strategy to reclaim the Hindu votes would work out or whether the BJP would gain further on account of their active involvement in organising protests and demonstrations. The CPI(M) is banking on a consolidation of minority votes to make up for any erosion in their Hindu vote bank in the process. They have also managed to enlist the support of Sree Narayana Dharama Paripalana Yogam (SNDP) general secretary Vellapally Nateshan.
The state government has mellowed its aggressive position on implementing the Supreme Court order following the CPI(M) party secretariat. But the damage was already done following the flip-flops of the Travancore Devaswom Board president. The ‘prayer processions’ taken out in various parts of the state have seen women participate in large numbers. The BJP has threatened to undertake a ‘long march’ to the Secretariat to mount further pressure on the government. Protesters have also erected pandals in Nilackal – one of the base camps of the Sabarimala shrine in the foothills – threatening to intensify their stir in the coming days if the government goes ahead with the implementation of the Supreme Court order.
The state government will have to think on their feet to come up with a solution at the earliest as maintenance of law and order is just as imperative as following the law of the land. The NSS, one of the respondents in the case, filed the first review petition challenging the verdict in the Supreme Court followed by four more review petitions by other respondents. But with the Supreme Court closing for a 10-day vacation from October 12 (for puja holidays), it is expected that the petitions won’t be entertained before October 18. A plea to expedite the hearing was junked by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi on Tuesday. 
With the opening of the temple for the season due next week, Pinarayi Vijayan will have to tread cautiously lest the Hindutva outfits manage to whip up the religious sentiments of people into a frenzy.
Sabarimala: Why the Kerala Government May Be in Contempt of Court
Much has already been written about what is wrong with last week’s decision of the Supreme Court in the Sabarimala review petitions. To recapitulate briefly, the court failed to answer the primary question before it – whether the review petitioners had made out sufficient grounds to necessitate a review of its 2018 judgment, which opened up the Sabarimala temple to women of all ages. Instead, by a narrow 3:2 majority, it kept the petitions pending till such time certain overarching questions related to the right to religion are resolved by a larger bench.
The majority – comprising of ex-Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, Justices A.M. Khanwilkar and Indu Malhotra – referred the issue of restrictive religious practices against women to a larger bench. It reasoned that as other petitions relating to such issues are pending, an eventual reference to a larger bench is likely. Anticipating such a future referral, it made a reference now itself and kept the review pending.
Also Read: There Is Enough Clarity in the Sabarimala Verdict
Given the narrow grounds on which a review petition is typically allowed, the move of the majority to keep the review pending was curious at best, and a subversion of judicial propriety at worst. The impropriety of such an exercise was made clear by Justice Nariman, who authored the dissenting judgment for himself and Justice D.Y. Chandrachud. In the dissent, it was categorically held that the court had not been tasked with answering if larger constitutional questions, which may also have a bearing on the Sabarimala issue, may emerge in the future. The dissent then sticks to the role it was assigned and holds that the review petitioners by merely rehashing the arguments made during the hearing leading up to the 2018 judgment, had failed to establish any grounds for review.
Supreme Court of India. Photo: Flickr
Unanimous decision on operation of 2018 judgment
So what happens to women’s entry to the temple in the meanwhile? It may be many years before a larger bench disposes of the overarching constitutional questions.
To begin with, the majority judgment has not placed a stay on the operation of the 2018 judgment. More significantly, the dissent has in the strongest possible terms emphasised the importance of implementing the 2018 judgment in letter and spirit. Towards this, it has directed the Kerala government to give wide publicity to its 2018 judgment and act against any attempts to prevent women’s entry. In fact, the dissent has set aside as much as half of its opinion only to highlight how the decisions of the Supreme Court have to be followed by those bound by it and how all authorities have an obligation to ensure their implementation.
Given the lack of stay by the majority and the strictures by the dissent, it is clear that the court is unanimous in its verdict that the 2018 judgment continues to operate with full force.
Kerala government’s response
Despite this, the Kerala government has decided to not let women of the erstwhile prohibited age categories from entering the temple till such time the larger bench decides the reference. This has ostensibly been done on the basis of legal advice received from the advocate general. The government’s move is in stark contrast to its response in 2018, when it firmly stood by the Supreme Court judgment.
Also Read: Sabarimala: 10 Women Sent Back by Police as Ayyappa Temple Opens
While it is possible that the motivation behind such a decision is more political than legal, the government risks being in contempt of court if it sticks to its decision. Article 129 as well as 142(2) along with the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 confer on the Supreme Court broad powers to enforce its decisions and punish those who fail to abide by them. As already pointed out, the dissenting judgment goes to great length to explain the duties cast upon the executive to ensure the implementation of Supreme Court decisions.
The seriousness of these observations may be gauged from Justice Nariman’s censure of the Enforcement Directorate in an unrelated case, where he directed them to read the dissent in the Sabarimala review and warned them from “playing with” the Supreme Court judgments.
Devotees at the Sabarimala temple. Photo: PTI
Looking ahead
Although some may prefer to view the Kerala government’s decision kindly given the mayhem which ensued post the 2018 judgment, Justices Nariman and Chandrachud’s opinion posits a framework for preventing another such outbreak. In order to achieve universal consensus, they ask the Government to hold “broad-based consultations with representatives of all affected interests so that the modalities devised for implementing the judgment of the Court meet the genuine concerns
of all segments of the community”. Nevertheless, this is immediately followed up by a firm direction to “put down firmly” any “organised acts of resistance to thwart the implementation of this judgment”.
Thus, the November 14 review judgment may pose no impediment to the Pinarayi Vijayan-led government’s efforts to usher in a “new renaissance”. If anything, it should be seen as paving a clear path for the renaissance movement to march on through collaborative engagement. Thus, any backtracking is not only misguided but potentially in violation of the Court’s directions.
Sabarimala Row: BJP, Congress Step up Protests in Kerala
New Delhi: BJP Kerala unit chief P.S. Sreedharan Pillai was Thursday booked for his speech in connection with Sabarimala protests on a day when the BJP launched a march to ‘protect’ the Lord Ayyappa temple’s traditions and rituals.
Stepping up protests against the Supreme Court order allowing women of menstruating age entry into Sabarimala, the BJP rolled out a six-day “Save Sabarimala Rath Yatra” from Kerala’s Kasargod district to “protect the traditions and rituals” of the temple.
According to Scroll.in, the rally is set to culminate at Erumeli near Sabarimala on November 13, when the apex court will hear the review petitions against its September 28 verdict. The temple is set to open again for the main season of pilgrimage from November 16.
B.S. Yeddyurappa, former Karnataka chief minister, flagged off the march which is being led by BJP state president Pillai and Bharat Dharma Jana Sena president Tushar Vellapally.
BJP Kerala unit chief P.S. Sreedharan Pillai. Credit: ANI
“Our party is not against the Supreme Court’s order but people’s sentiments also must be respected. When 90% of women devotees are against the order, it is our duty to oppose it,” Yeddyurappa was quoted by NDTV as saying.
Congress rally
The Congress, meanwhile, also launched a rally after a gap of just six hours. Led by state working president K. Sudhakaran from Perla, the party had planned a padyatra and other protests from five locations – Kasaragod, Alapuzha, Thiruvananthapuram, Thodupuzha and Palakkad – against the “politicisation” of the issue. The rallies are likely to culminate on November 15 in Pathanamthitta.
Ramesh Chennithala, leader of the opposition in the Kerala legislative assembly, reportedly said: “The Congress is launching five yatras in Kerala not only on the issue of Sabarimala but other central and state issues.”
Hitting out at the BJP’s protest, the Congress termed it “political opportunism.” Further slamming the BJP’s ideological mentor, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), state Congress chief Mullappally Ramachandran said, “RSS’s first response after the Supreme Court verdict was to welcome the order. Soon after seeing the sentiments of a section of devotees, they changed their stand. This is nothing but political opportunism and that’s what the BJP and RSS are doing in the state.”
File photo of protests at Sabarimala. Credit: PTI
Case against BJP’s Pillai
The case against Pillai was registered on a complaint by journalist Shybin alleging that the BJP leader had instigated activists to protest against the entry of women of menstruating age into the hill shrine recently, police said.
Reacting to it, Pillai, accused the CPI(M) and Congress of ‘witch hunting’ and trying to ‘tarnish’ his image.
Police said Pillai has been booked under section 505 (1) (B) of IPC (intent to incite or which is likely to incite persons to commit any offence), a non-cognizable offence, in connection with his November 4 address to BJP Yuva Morcha workers in Kozhikode.
Also read: Appropriation of Ayyappa Cult: The History and Hinduisation of Sabarimala Temple
The Wire previously reported that TV channels on Monday aired a video clip in which Sreedharan Pillai is seen saying that the Sabarimala temple head priest consulted him before threatening the closure of the shrine if women in the 10-50 age group entered it.
“Sabarimala is a golden opportunity. It is an issue. Settling the Sabarimala issue in a straight line is not possible. We put forward an agenda and everyone else surrendered to it, leaving only us and our enemies, the government and its parties,” he can be heard saying.
Addressing the workers at Mathur in Kasaragod, Pillai Thursday hit out at the CPI(M), alleging that it was trying to destroy the Sabarimala temple since the past 60 years.
Sabarimala issue
Kerala has been on a boil since the Supreme Court verdict on Sabarimala with right-wing and Hindutva outfits on a warpath over the state government’s decision to go ahead and implement the order.
Also read: The Politics of Sabarimala in the Aftermath of the SC Verdict
The hill shrine had recently witnessed protests by devotees against the attempt by some young women, including journalists, to enter the temple.
The day also saw the Kerala high court coming down on the recent agitation at Sabarimala. Justice Sunil Thomas termed the violence as “unjustifiable” and agreed with the state’s contention that the protests and violence at the hill shrine and its key entry points were against the apex court’s directives.
“Agitations are unjustifiable,” the court said while dismissing a bail application filed by Govind Madhusoodan of Tripunithura, who was arrested in connection with clashes with the police at Nilackal near Pamba when the temple doors were opened for monthly puja last month.
Sabarimala Case: Supreme Court to Hear Review Petitions in Open Court on January 22
New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Tuesday refused to stay its verdict allowing entry of women of all age groups into the Sabarimala temple but agreed to hear in open court on January 22 a batch of review petitions in the matter.
The review petitions against the September 28 verdict were taken up ‘in-chamber’ by a bench of Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices R F Nariman, A M Khanwilkar, D Y Chandrachud and Indu Malhotra.
“All the Review Petitions along with all pending applications will be heard in Open Court on 22nd January 2019 before the appropriate Bench. We make it clear that there is no stay of the judgment and order of this Court dated 28th September 2018 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No.373 of 2006 (Indian Young Lawyers Association & Ors. vs. The State of Kerala & Ors),” the order said.
Also Read: SC: Fresh Pleas on Sabarimala Will Be Heard After Review Petitions Decided
In the in-chamber proceedings, the judges examine the review petitions by circulation and lawyers are not present.
There are around 48 petitions seeking review of the judgement.
Earlier in the day, the top court had made it clear that fresh pleas related to the Sabarimala Temple will be heard only after it decides the earlier petitions seeking review of the judgment allowing entry of women of all age groups into the shrine in Kerala.
The bench stated this while hearing the three fresh petitions filed by G Vijaya Kumar, S Jaya Rajkumar and Shailaja Vijayan challenging its September 28 verdict.
On September 28, a five-judge constitution bench headed by then Chief Justice Dipak Misra, in its 4:1 verdict, had paved the way for the entry of women of all ages into the Sabarimala Temple saying the ban amounted to gender discrimination.
The top court had on October 9 declined an urgent hearing on the review plea filed by an association which had contended that the five-judge Constitution bench’s verdict lifting the ban was “absolutely untenable and irrational”.
A plea filed by the National Ayyappa Devotees Association (NADA), which has sought review of the verdict, had said: “The notion that the judgment under review is revolutionary, one which removes the stigma or the concept of dirt or pollution associated with menstruation, is unfounded.
“It is a judgment welcomed by hypocrites who were aspiring for media headlines. On the merits of the case, as well, the said judgment is absolutely untenable and irrational, if not perverse.”
Also Read: Read: What the Supreme Court Had to Say While Allowing Women Entry Into Sabarimala
Besides the association, several other petitions, including one by the Nair Service Society (NSS), have been filed against the apex court verdict.
The NSS had said in the plea that as the deity is a ‘Naistika Brahmachari’, females below the age of 10 and after the age of 50 years are eligible to worship him and there is no practice of excluding worship by females.
“Hence, the delay or wait for 40 years to worship cannot be considered as exclusionary and it is an error of law on the face of the judgement,” the plea had said.
Sabarimala Case: Kerala Govt Not to File Review Petition Against SC
Thiruvananthapuram: The Kerala government on Wednesday made it clear it has no plan to file a review petition against the Supreme Court order allowing women of all age groups into the Lord Ayyappa Temple at Sabarimala.
The Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB), which manages the hill shrine, has also not taken any decision to go for any review in this regard, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan told reporters here.
The TDB president had stated that the Board may examine the possibility of filing the review petition, while the opposition Congress and BJP had asked the government to do the same holding that traditions and belief of the temple have to be protected.
Terming the recent developments connected with Sabarimala a “serious” matter, Vijayan said as a government, it has to abide by directives of the top court and make necessary arrangements for women devotees visiting the shrine.
Also read: What the Supreme Court Had to Say While Allowing Women Entry Into Sabarimala
“It is the responsibility of the government to implement the court order without any compromise. We will ensure to make necessary arrangements for the women devotees in the upcoming season itself,” he said.
He also took exception to TDB President A. Padmakumar’s recent remark that they were not expecting large number of women devotees at the shrine in the wake of the court order.
The Sabarimala Temple had restricted the entry of women belonging to the age group between 10-50 due as part of its age-old tradition.
On September 28, a five-judge constitution bench headed by the then Chief Justice Dipak Misra lifted the ban on entry of women of menstrual age into the shrine.
With regard to the protest launched by various outfits against implementing the court verdict, the Chief Minister said no one has the right to prevent women devotees if they want to go to the shrine and offer worship.
Also read: Sabarimala: A Guide to the Tricky Issues Facing the Supreme Court
“When the Supreme Court has taken a stand after considering all aspects on the matter, people have to accept the law of the land. The government is for implementing it,” he added.
Hundreds of Ayyappa devotees, including women, Tuesday had blocked state and national highways in various parts of Kerala protesting the Supreme Court verdict.
BJP state President S. Sreedharan Pillai had said the party plans to launch state-wide agitations to protect the interest of Sabarimala devotees.
Congress leader Ramesh Chennithala had urged the TDB to file a review petition and also asked the government to arrive at a consensus on the issue.

As Sabarimala Hearings Continue, SC Mulls Relevance of Essential Practices Doctrine
New Delhi: Historically, the essential practices doctrine has helped the Indian Supreme Court decide which religious practices are eligible for constitutional protection. This involved the court playing the role of religious arbiter to determine which of the practices are integral to a religion, and which are not.  
The doctrine initially implied complete autonomy to religious denominations to decide which religious practices were essential for them. However, since 1958, it is the court which decides. This led to criticism among scholars as to whether the court had the mandate to interpret a religion, to determine which rituals and beliefs are integral to a religion. 
The ongoing hearing before the Supreme Court’s Constitution bench in Indian Young Lawyers Association vs State of Kerala thus saw conflicting arguments on the relevance of the doctrine to determine whether menstruating women have the right to worship at the Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala, Kerala. The petitioners who have challenged the validity of the rule prohibiting women of menstruating age (between ten and 50 years of age) from entering it argue that it is not an essential part of religion. The respondents who defend the rule, however, insist that the Sabarimala temple is a denomination and the controversial practice is integral to it. 
On Thursday, Justice D.Y. Chandrachud, one of the five judges on the constitution bench, observed that the core of the case is not whether it is essential to religion or not, because constitutional values must prevail over the essential aspects of a religion.   
Breaking from the historical role played by the court in assuming for itself the role of the interpreter to determine which practice is integral to a religion, Justice Chandrachud asked, “Should the court assume a theological mantle?”, answering it himself, “No”.
According to Justice Chandrachud, irrespective of whether the practice is an essential aspect of a religion or denomination, or even if it is an essential aspect, constitutional values must prevail. He added: “In the garb of essential practice, judges are asked to wear the theological mantle. It is not our function”. 
In a sense, Justice Chandrachud echoed the observations of Justice Bhagabati Prasad Banerjee of the Calcutta high court, while hearing a case in 1990: “If the Courts started enquiring and deciding the rationality of a particular religious practice, then there might be confusion and the religious practice would become what the courts wish the practice to be”. (Source: Articles of Faith: Religion, Secularism, and the Indian Supreme Court by Ronojoy Sen, Oxford, 2010).
Although Justice Chandrachud’s observations mark a clear break from the Supreme Court’s previous jurisprudence, it is not so easy for the Court to disown the essential practices doctrine completely. As Ronojoy Sen points out in his book, the essential practices test was one of the major tools whereby the Supreme Court sanctioned a complex regulatory regime for Hindu temples. 
Another instance of the doctrine’s relevance is the controversy over whether praying at a mosque is integral to Islam – an issue which is now agitating the Supreme Court’s three-judge bench hearing the Babri Masjid title case. Rajeev Dhavan, senior counsel representing the Muslim parties in the case has sought reconsideration of the issue by a larger bench, as in his view, the constitution bench in the Ismail Farooqui case wrongly decided that it was not an essential practice of Islam. The bench has reserved its judgment on the issue.
The doctrine, as Sen’s book shows, was also useful to justify the court’s intervention to rid a religion of its obscurantist practices, and introduce social reform. 
 In 1996, Justice K. Ramaswamy of the Supreme Court, while upholding an Act passed by the Andhra Pradesh assembly to regulate the affairs of the Tirumala temple, enunciated the idea of a higher religion, as fundamental to the doctrine. According to him, it is dharma rather than conventional religion that is protected by the constitution. Dharma, according to Justice B.L. Hansaria, the other judge on the bench, encapsulates those great laws and disciplines that uphold, sustain and ultimately lead humanity to the sublime heights of worldly and spiritual glory. 
In March 2004, another bench of the Supreme Court further narrowed the scope of essential practices to mean the foundational ‘core’ of a religion. “Essential part of a religion means the core belief upon which a religion is founded and those practices that are fundamental to follow a religious belief.  It is upon the cornerstone of essential parts of practices that the superstructure of religion is built, without which a religion will be no religion”, thus wrote majority Judges, while deciding that the practice of Tandava dance in public is not an essential part of Ananda Margi faith. 
On Thursday, the counsel for the intervener organisation, “People for Dharma”, Sai Deepak, asserted that the worshippers of Lord Ayyappa, irrespective of their religion, qualify as a ‘denomination’ for the purpose of Article 26, which guarantees every religious denomination the right to manage its own affairs in matters of religion, subject to public order, morality and health. He also argued that the deity, by having a distinct legal personality, was entitled to the rights under Articles 21, 25 (1) and 26(b). He suggested that Lord Ayyappa’s right to maintain his ‘perpetual celibate’ status was covered under the right to privacy under Article 21, Mehal Jain reported for Livelaw. 
Disagreeing with the bench, Sai Deepak contended that denomination is decided not on the background faith of the devotee, but whether he believes in what is essential characteristic of the temple/deity, reports Bar and Bench. 
Sai Deepak’s reply to Justice Chandrachud’s observation on the relevance of the essential practices doctrine was that every exclusion does not mean discrimination. 
Another counsel representing Ayyappa Seva Sangam, Kailasanatha Pillai, appealed to the bench to consider social realities, and be circumspect when exercising judicial review in matters of faith. He cautioned the bench that there could be social tensions in Kerala if the bench removes the bar on menstruating women from worshipping at Sabarimala.

There’s No Reason for Women to Celebrate their Entry to Sabarimala
Over the past few days, I, as a Dalit woman, have been trying hard to understand the reasons why the entry of two women into the Sabarimala temple was being hailed as a momentous victory for women’s rights in India. I must confess that I attempted in vain to try and see the logic behind this celebration. Finally, the only way I could wrap my head around this was to temporarily stop thinking as a Dalit woman.
I struggled to make this shift in my head. I told myself not to think about ‘intersectionality’. I kept telling myself to analyse this phenomenon in a vacuum (read: without caste). I tried to build a rationale in my head about the need for understanding this only through a ‘gender’ lens. Think as a ‘woman’, not as a Dalit woman, I kept repeating to myself. [I later figured why I could not do this – read on. You will know why.]
Also Read: Pinarayi Vijayan’s Social Reform Has Defeated the Sabarimala Protests
What is being celebrated? Who are the folks calling this a big step forward in women’s rights? How does the entry into the Sabarimala temple signal freedom for women?
Clearly, the people celebrating this victory at Sabarimala are predominantly dominant caste Hindu women. No single person is ever representative of the entire community and the same holds true for Dalit women as well. From an anti-caste feminist stand-point, the savarna-led feminist movement’s pressure to see this as a great victory for women – all the while being caste-blind – is reductionist, self-centred and hypocritical. There are three reasons I say so.
Dismantling patriarchy for gender equality?
For a long time, I assumed that the feminist movement in India aimed to puncture patriarchy. This primarily indicates that the path to gender equality meant freedom from male control, which in turn meant applying the brakes on obeisance to men.
For the life of me, I do not understand how ‘patriarchy’ is attacked when women devotees bow down before male priests and a male celibate god? Where in this spectrum lies the end of misogyny? So can somebody please explain to me how and why is the savarna women-led feminist movement in India claiming this to be a historic win for women rights?
Rehana Fatima and Kavitha Jakkal attempt to enter the Sabarimala temple. Credit: File/PTI
Gender equality – shifting of power relations?
My understanding was that feminist politics is geared towards disturbing the status quo and shifting power towards women. The ultimate objective is to transfer the power accumulated in the hands of men.
Once again, I fail to understand how the entry into Sabarimala ushers in a radical change of this kind. What kind of authority is transferred to the women devotees to strengthen decision-making power within the temple they are fighting to enter? The temple continues to be a male bastion, one in which all decisions are made by the exclusive Brahmin boys club. Savarna feminists still continue to welcome the entry of women into Sabarimala as a significant step towards gender equality. No logic or reasoning here.
Economic empowerment towards gender justice?
Economic independence, equal share of resources, access to property rights, creation of assets for women are often viewed as precursors to the emancipation of women. Feminists have lobbied extensively for gender responsive budgets towards exclusive allocations for women centred government schemes. Also, their voices are loud and clear in demanding land and property titles for women. Further, women’s groups have also escalated campaigns for recognizing women’s unpaid care work. One would safely assume that financial liberation and non-dependency on male counterparts would be an important agenda of feminist politics.
Also Read: The Ugly Reality of Caste Violence and Discrimination in Urban India
Once again I am stumped for answers – do the women devotees at Sabarimala get a say in the financial matters of the temple? Do they have access to temple property? Can they decide how the temple management spends the money? How, then can this be a historic win for women in India?
This episode has clearly revealed the fraudulent savarna feminist politics, which is hasty in its approach and limited in its scope of even imagining a world that is free of all forms of oppression. It is revealing of the shortsightedness of the savarna-led feminist discourse, which has often failed to recognise the entrenched nature of caste and its impact on women.
Violence of language
Instead, what they have done is to create more serious fissures, by once again unleashing a different kind of violence on Dalit women. It is a kind of violence that takes away our personhood and denies us our human existence.
Writing in the Washington Post, Barkha Dutt refers to repugnant modern day untouchability in which women are made to feel like ‘polluted pariahs’. So, my gut says that either she is not aware of the existence of Dalit women or she has once again revealed her caste privilege by erasing this fact. There is no other reason why anybody, let alone a self-proclaimed feminist, would make such a gross statement. It is difficult to fathom why she would use the word ‘pariah’, which is a derogatory cuss word – and the name of a caste in Tamil Nadu.
Further, a volley of tweets and opinions by savarna women surfaced with new language of neo-untouchability and hashtags like #WomenAreNotUntouchable. In order to create this kind of phrase, it is imperative to not feel ‘untouchable’ in the first place. This signifies clearly the caste dominance and privilege of savarna women who are creating this discourse by almost normalising untouchability faced by Dalits, including women.

Did you know #WomenAreNotUntouchable?
So who are these women?? pic.twitter.com/vzwDWLFrM6
— zoyazech (@ashakowtal) January 2, 2019

One could place legal arguments about the usage of the word ‘untouchability’ by referring to Article 17 of the Constitution. However, bereft of the understanding of Brahmanical patriarchy and legitimacy sanctioned by Hindu texts, which is the core of untouchability, it holds no ground for me.
As Dalit women, who bear the pain of untouchability and discrimination, this kind of linguistic violence inflicts pain and incites rage. It is more than evident now that unless savarna women dismantle the structures that they have benefitted from, there is no meaning of solidarity.
As Dalit women, we are aware of the broken world that we live in and hence are not hasty to create more cracks. We organise ourselves with a dream of creating a world that is free from all forms of oppression. It is a world that will offer happiness, security and human rights for all. Our lived experiences of intersectional violence and injustice have made us strong and determined with an eye to call a spade a spade.
Compassion and kindness has guided us through lessons from our foremothers like Savitri Mai. But we will not remain silent when you trample over us like this in the name of gender equality by entering Hindu temples that have sanctioned this oppression called caste.
Asha Kowtal is general secretary of the All India Dalit Mahila Adhikar Manch.

What If Sabarimala Was in a BJP-Ruled State?
The nation is worried that Sabarimala may become the next Ayodhya. Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan has assured people that he won’t allow that to happen. But judging by the events that have unfolded since September, I am not convinced.
I covered a similar protest in Maharashtra’s Ahmednagar district, at Shani Shingnapur village. There was tension there for about 40 days in 2016, but the responses of everyone involved were far removed from what is playing out in Kerala in the name of faith and tradition.
The 400-year-old Shani temple has a sanctum sanctorum comprising a 5.5-feet-high black rock installed on an open-air platform. Women were not allowed in, but through dialogue, they gained entry into the sanctum sanctorum in 2016 without any violence.
The power of dialogue
If we have to give credit for how that situation turned out, it should go to the trustees for trying hard to exchange ideas with all stakeholders involved, including their then challenger social activist Trupti Desai. Women from the village were also open-minded enough to allow other women devotees to enter the sanctum sanctorum, even if they did not believe they should go in themselves.
In Sabarimala, social rifts are challenging faith and constitutional rights, and thus not allowing implementation of the Supreme Court order. In the Shani Shingnapur case, however, a Bombay high court order ensured that the principle of equality was respected.
Also read: Women Walking into Sabarimala Marks a Historic Beginning to 2019
While the Shani Shingnapur protests were on, feminist leader Vidya Bal and advocate Nileema Vartak filed a public interest litigation in the Bombay high court. The PIL sought the court’s intervention to ensure the implementation of The Maharashtra Hindu places of Public Worship (Entry Authorization) Act, 1956. This law was meant to abolish untouchability from the every spectrum of society, and prohibits discrimination of any kind at Hindu temples. During the hearing, the state assured the court that the law would be implemented and so the PIL was disposed off.
But religious harmony was not achieved only by law enforcement officials in this village. A dialogue with the locals by Varkari tradition leaders Badrinath Maharaj Tanpure (Gadgebaba Maharaj panth) and Bhaskargiri Maharaj had a significant impact. The Varkari tradition has been a part of Hinduism in Maharashtra since the 13th century. The community follows spiritual beliefs and practices based on peace, harmony and non-violence, and its literature is known for its gender-sensitive, progressive outlook. The Kerala government could have opened a dialogue with Sabarimala protesters in a similar way.
In Shani Shingnapur, villagers had their own reasons to argue that women should not enter the temple – they believe that as a brahmachari, Shani doesn’t welcome women devotees. For 40 years, women had not been allowed to enter the sanctum sanctorum, though some elders shared memories of earlier years when this wasn’t a strict tradition.
There is no information available on when exactly it became the rule not to allow women in, but till April 8, 2016 women were banned from entering the sanctum sanctorum. Even now, local women believe that God will not curse them as long as they do not touch the God themselves. But they have accepted the importance of law and the high court order, and so are allowing others into the sanctum sanctorum.
How the change unfolded
On November 28, 2015, a young female devotee entered the Shani deity’s platform. Nobody stopped her or asked her to step down, and she was captured on a CCTV camera. Later in the day, though, this footage wreaked havoc. The temple management trust decided to do ‘purify’ the entire temple the next day. The trust shared the footage of the purification process with the media and claimed that the temple was ‘sanctified’ again.
Seven security guards who failed to “protect” god Shani from female devotees were suspended with immediate effect. To date, the identity of the woman devotee is not known, and so no one knows whether she entered the sanctum sanctorum intentionally. Some have argued that she may have had a mental disability, but there is no proof of this either.
People gathered at the Shani Shingnapur temple in 2016. Credit: PTI/Files
Meanwhile, Trupti Desai, founder of the Bhumata Brigade and then a little-known social activist, was watching this news on television. As a ‘Hindu believer’, she decided to claim her religious right to enter Shani Shingnapur. On December 20, 2015, Trupti along with other women tried to enter the sanctum sanctorum, but they were stopped and villagers protested.
Desai was taken to the local police station. She then gave the temple trustees and Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis an eight-day ultimatum to create an atmosphere in which she could enter the sanctum sanctorum. Later, she announced a protest from Pune to Shani Shingnapur temple with other female devotees on January 26, 2016. At Supa village, before her destination, Desai was taken into police custody.
Temple trustees recognised that a crisis may be brewing because of their decision not to allow women in. Consequently, they banned male devotees too from entering the sanctum sanctorum. Only two male devotees (paying close to Rs 11,000) and male priests were allowed to perform the abhishek on Shani. This formula came from none other than self-proclaimed spiritual guru Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. As meetings between temple trustees and the government did not bear fruit, they mutually decided to reach out to Sri Sri for his ‘art of negotiation’. Temple trustees camped in his Bangalore ashram for days and he held meetings in Maharashtra.
Also read: ‘This Is the Decade of Awakening on Women’s Rights’: Novelist K.R. Meera
We have to understand why Sri Sri could interfere in this matter. Before the Maharashtra government took over the Shani Shingnapur and other temple trusts in 2018, the trust was controlled by Nationalist Congress Party members. The party’s top leaders said that the issue must be resolved, but beyond that made no attempts to get things under control. Fadnavis was making statements in support of female devotees and addressing Desai’s demands, but beyond that lip service he did nothing. The authorities did not try to implement the 1956 Act. The trustees and the government both decided that Sri Sri Ravi Shankar was the answer.
Sri Sri came up with two formulas. The first was the Tirupati-Balaji temple formula, where the sanctum sanctorum is out of bounds for both men and women. Second was the Kashi Vishwanath temple, one of the holiest Hindu shrines, where both men and women are allowed into the sanctum sanctorum.
Not the law alone
The high court order of April 1, 2016 had no impact in the first week. Then came the festival of Gudi Padwa, during which villagers traditionally conducted a water abhishek of the deity. When the same people who were blocking Desai and her followers were not allowed into the sanctum sanctorum either, they felt insulted. On April 8, 2016, they stepped onto the Shani platform for the abhishek.
The moment this news was in the public domain, Desai and her followers reached Ahmednagar and performed the puja too. Women were not stopped this time.
Meanwhile, from the the day Desai started her protest, Varkari leaders from the region visited the village and started a dialogue. They were even part of the meetings with Sri Sri. When the court order came and male devotees decided to perform the jal abhishek, these Varkari leaders convinced villagers that it was time to respect women and the law. Had that conversation not happened in the village, the opposition could have become violent or continued till today, like in Sabarimala.
Desai later took up similar protests at the Nashik Triambakeshwar temple and Kolhapur Mahalaxmi temple. Recently, she tried to visit the Sabarimala temple too and returned after an unsuccessful attempt. Revisiting the Shani Shingnapur protest shows that a dialogue with all stakeholders right from the beginning could have changed the outcome at Sabarimala.
Alka Dhupkar is the Editor of Symple Times, a newspaper to be launched soon by the Sakal Media Group.

All Eyes on SC: CJI Ranjan Gogoi Expected to Give Crucial Orders Before Retirement
New Delhi: With just five working days – November 11 to November 15 – remaining before Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi retires on November 17, all eyes are now on the Supreme Court as benches headed by him are due to pronounce judgments in some very important cases.
Ayodhya 
The most sensitive of these judgments would be for the Ayodhya Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid title dispute case. After 40 days of daily hearings from August 6, a five-judge bench headed by CJI Gogoi and comprising Justices S.A. Bobde, D.Y. Chandrachud, Ashok Bhushan and S.A. Nazeer, reserved judgment in the matter on October 16.
The case pertains to ownership of 2.77 acres of disputed land in Ayodhya. While Hindu parties have claimed that the land is the birthplace of Lord Ram, the Muslim parties have claimed otherwise. Several gazettes, historians, land documents, travelogues and reports of Archaeological Survey of India were quoted during the course of the arguments.
Wary that the judgment should not result in a law and order situation, several Muslim and Hindu rightwing groups including Bharatiya Janata Party and its parent organisation, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh have appealed for peace and restraint. It has also been urged that there should be no celebrations or excessive mourning over the verdict.
Meanwhile, Justice Gogoi has called a meeting with the Uttar Pradesh chief secretary and director general of police to assess the situation in the state ahead of the verdict.
Also read: ‘Kashi-Mathura Baaqi Hain’: Why the Ayodhya Verdict Won’t Offer Any Respite From Saffron Hatred
Rafale judgment review
The Supreme Court in its December 14, 2018 order had refused to call for an investigation into allegations of corruption in the Rafale aircraft deal. Subsequently, a joint review petition was filed by advocate Prashant Bhushan, and former Union ministers Arun Shourie and Yashwant Sinha.
On May 10, the last day before summer vacations, a bench headed by CJI Gogoi and comprising Justices S.K. Kaul and K.M. Joseph reserved its order in the case.
The main contention of the plea was that the Central Bureau of Investigation had failed to register a First Information Report on a corruption complaint filed by the petitioners in October 2018 regarding the purchase of 36 jets. The petitioners also claimed that the Central government misled the court by not presenting all the facts before it.
Also watch: #BeyondTheHeadlines: Rafale – Seven Questions We Still Don’t Know the Answer To
The Centre argued that Supreme Court court enjoyed limited jurisdiction over government policy and that it had taken a “conscious decision” to go ahead with the deal to procure the jets.
Contempt plea against Rahul Gandhi
A related case on which a judgment is also expected pertains to a criminal contempt plea filed by BJP leader Meenakshi Lekhi against Congress leader Rahul Gandhi.
Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi. Photo: PTI
Though Gandhi has unconditionally apologised for wrongfully attributing the phrase ‘chowkidar chor hai‘ to the apex court following its verdict on April 10 allowing the maintainability of the Rafale review petitions, on May 10, the bench headed by CJI Gogoi also reserved its judgment in the matter.
In its April 10 order, the Bench had rejected the Centre’s objections against examining “leaked” documents which had been published by several online publications and newspapers, including The Hindu.
The Centre had objected to the same, stating that they had been obtained without authorisation and this amounted to violation of the Official Secrets Act. The apex court, however, rejected this contention around their legality, saying if they were relevant otherwise then their admissibility would not be affected.
Sabarimala verdict review case
In its September 28, 2018 judgment, the Supreme Court held that not allowing women in their “menstruating years” into the Sabarimala is ultra vires the constitution, and all women should be allowed to enter the temple. The 4:1 verdict, delivered by a five-judge constitution bench headed by then CJI Dipak Misra, noted that “the dualistic approach against women degrades the status of women.”
It allowed women of all age-groups the right to enter the temple.
Also read: Appropriation of Ayyappa Cult: The History and Hinduisation of Sabarimala Temple
The order was challenged by the Travancore Devaswom Board, the Pandalam Royal Family and groups of devotees through a total of 65 review petitions. The petitions were heard by a constitution bench of CJI Gogoi and Justices A.M. Khanwilkar, R.F. Nariman, D.Y. Chandrachud and Indu Malhotra. The bench reserved its orders on these review petitions after hearing them for a full day on February 6.
The main contention of the petitioners was that the practice of not allowing women into the shrine was because of the celibate character of the deity. They also stated that constitutional morality should not be applied to matters of faith and that the judgment erred in viewing the practice as “untouchability” under Article 17 of the Constitution as it did not understand the historical context.
Bringing office of CJI under RTI
A five-judge constitution bench headed by CJI Gogoi on April 4 reserved its judgment on an appeal to bring the office of the Chief Justice of India under the Right to Information Act, 2015.
The plea was filed by Supreme Court secretary general against a January 2010 judgment of the Delhi high court which held the office of the CJI to be a “public authority” as per the definition provided by Section 2(h) of the RTI Act.
After it remained pending in the Supreme Court for nine years, the appeal was taken up by the bench headed by the CJI.
Applicability of Finance Act on tribunals
Another important judgment which is awaited pertains to a petition filed by Revenue Bar Association against provisions of Finance Act 2017 that affected the power and structures of various tribunals. The petitioner stated that the Finance Act, as it is passed as a money bill, cannot change the composition of tribunals.
The petition also noted that the provisions of the Finance Act affecting various tribunals such as the National Green Tribunal, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal were unconstitutional and in violation of the doctrine of separation of powers.
The Centre’s response was that provisions were brought in as part of a money bill since they dealt with the salaries and allowances of the members of the tribunals for which the money came from the consolidated funds of India. This was opposed by the petitioners on the ground that a bill merely covering salaries does not become a money bill.
The Supreme Court had reserved its judgment in the case on April 2, this year.

Rahul Easwar Taken Into Custody For His Provocative Statements Over Sabarimala
Thiruvananthapuram: Police on Sunday took into custody Rahul Easwar, president of the ‘Ayyappa Dharma Sena’, for his alleged provocative statement related to the entry of women into the Lord Ayyappa Temple at Sabarimala.
A team of police personnel from Kochi took Easwar into custody from his flat here in connection with a case registered under IPC Sections 153 (wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot) and 117 (abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than 10 persons), police said.
The arrest will be recorded in the evening after they reach Kochi, police sources said.
A member of the Thazhamon family of Sabarimala tantris (head priests), Easwar had said during a press meet in Kochi last week that they had a contingency plan to force the closure of the temple by spilling blood on its premises by some devotees in case any woman in the ‘barred’ age group managed to reach it.
He had also claimed that 20 Lord Ayyappa devotees opposing the entry of women in the age group of 10 and 50 were ready to inflict knife injuries on themselves on the temple premises, which would have forced the priests to close the gates on account of impurity.
“Had their blood fallen on the floor of the temple, that would have forced the priests to shut the shrine for three days for purification rituals,” Easwar had said.
A case was registered against him later on the basis of a complaint filed by a Thiruvananthapuram native.
Also read: If It Were Men Who Bled, Would Sabarimala Still be An Issue?
Kerala Devaswom Minister Kadakkampally Surendran had claimed that effective police intervention had foiled the protesters’ bid to “desecrate” the Ayyappa Temple by spilling blood in the premises if women devotees in the 10-50 age group offered prayers.
He had said the “conspiracy” of the devotees was made clear by the statement of Rahul Easwar.
The Minister had also said the disclosure showed that there was a well-conceived plan, similar to that followed by nations to attack their enemies and added that this attempt was not only ‘seditious,’ but also against the interests of devotees.
Easwar was earlier arrested from Sabarimala Sannidhanam (temple complex) on October 17 over the ‘save Sabarimala campaign, and later released on bail.
The temple had witnessed high drama with around a dozen women in 10-50 age group being prevented from entering the temple by protesting devotees after the doors were opened for all women, following the Supreme Court verdict.
On September 28, a five-judge Constitution bench of the Apex Court, headed by then Chief Justice Dipak Misra, had lifted the centuries-old ban on the entry of women of menstrual age into the shrine.
BJP state President P.S. Sreedharan Pillai Sunday lashed out at the police action against Easwar.
“BJP condemns the police action on Rahul Easwar and also those associated wit the protests over the Sabarimala issue,” he told reporters.
Smriti Irani on Sabarimala: Would You Take Sanitary Napkins Soaked in Menstrual Blood Into a Friend's Home?
New Delhi: In the wake of the Sabarimala controversy centred around menstruating women entering the temple, Union textiles minister Smriti Irani has said that “while everyone has the right to pray, not to desecrate”, the Indian Express reported.
In a news clip tweeted by CNN-News 18, Irani can be heard saying, “I am nobody to speak on the Supreme Court verdict because I am a current serving Cabinet minister.” The tweet has since been deleted.
However, she adds that, it is “plain common sense”: “Would you take sanitary napkins soaked in menstrual blood into a friend’s home? So, why would you take them into the house of God”. Her remarks came in the light of an activist who intended to take a blood-soaked sanitary napkin into Sabarimala.

Correction: @smritiirani talking about “desecration”given a female activist wanted to take blood soaked sanitary pad into Sabrimala. Read in that light,her comment not as outrageous as it sounds.She was not talking about temple entry for menstruating women https://t.co/xsbE6RGAdP
— Rupa Subramanya (@rupasubramanya) October 23, 2018

Later in the evening, Irani mounted her defence on Twitter in a thread, saying, “Since many people are talking about my comments — let me comment on my comment. As a practising Hindu married to a practising Zoroastrian I am not allowed to enter a fire temple to pray.”

I respect that stand by the Zoroastrian community / priests and do not approach any court for a right to pray as a mother of 2 Zoroastrian children. Similarly Parsi or non Parsi menstruating women irrespective of age DO NOT go to a Fire Temple.
— Smriti Z Irani (@smritiirani) October 23, 2018

On September 28, a five-judge constitution bench ruled that not allowing women in their “menstruating years” into the Sabarimala is ultra vires the constitution, and all women should be allowed to enter the temple.
Following the verdict, while the Kerala government pushed forward with the Supreme Court’s verdict to lift the ban on entry of menstruating women into the Sabarimala temple, the state’s BJP unit has urged that an ordinance be passed to continue the ban
Also read: Sabarimala Verdict: A Godsend for the Hindutva Brigade
Since the Supreme Court verdict, several public figures have come under fire for their controversial remarks on the issue.
On October 13, Malayalam actor Kollam Thulasi, a BJP supporter, issued an open threat against the ban on entry of women into Sabarimala temple, saying that any woman who attempts to enter the temple should be “ripped apart”.
Five days later, Union minister of state for shipping and finance Pon Radhakrishnan said the movement was started by “people with perverted minds” and asked if it was fair to level accusations over incidents that happened years ago.
Sabarimala Verdict: A Godsend for the Hindutva Brigade
Kerala is under siege like never before in its volatile history. As the state struggles to get back on its feet after the worst floods in a century, it is convulsed in a violent religious campaign that belongs to another time and place. For the saffron brigade, the Supreme Court’s decision to allow the entry of women of all ages into the hilltop temple of Ayyappan in Sabarimala has come as a godsend, the perfect handle to reignite the regressive religious campaign that the RSS-BJP cohort has been pushing for decades in the last Left bastion in the country.
In just three weeks after the SC judgement, Kerala has been reduced to a violent, seething mass of agitators seeking to preserve the status quo at a forest-bound temple that debars women between 10 and 50 years from entering its precincts. From Pandalam, seat of the erstwhile royal family which claims a kinship with the deity, to Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram, thousands of protesting women, organised by the hydra-headed RSS and various Hindu outfits, have been swarming across the state demanding that the CPM-led Left Democratic Front government file a review petition in the Supreme Court and also issue an ordinance to stop women of the restricted age group from going to Sabarimala. The protests have exposed the ingrained obscurantism beneath the veneer of a progressive society and the cynical politics of religion that is at play.
Coarse, violent language – unheard of in Kerala – is making the headlines as the BJP whips up religious frenzy. Actor Kollam Thulasi shocked listeners as he told an NDA rally in Kollam that women who tried to enter the temple must be ripped in half. For good measure, Thulasi, a known BJP supporter, said one half of the woman should be sent to the chief minister’s office in Thiruvananthapuram and the other half to Delhi. “What we are seeing is a repeat of the Ayodhya madness and north Indian barbarity, both new to our state,” says P. Jyothsna, a high school teacher from Irrity.
Also read: Rip Women Entering Sabarimala in Half, Says Actor Kollam Thulasi At BJP-Led Rally
All of a sudden, the discourse is about “vishwasam” or belief, an odd subject for Kerala where the semantics of dialectic materialism continues to be discussed. The state, however, is a paradox in many ways, a place where religion and rituals fill the calendar while communist governments are voted in regularly. This time though things could change and, possibly, in a lasting way. The frenzied politics of religion that is being played out over Sabarimala is extraordinary and could well tip the balance of power and the fortunes of the three main political formations in the state: the CPM-led Left Democratic Front (LDF), the BJP’s NDA and the United Democratic Front of the Congress and its allies which includes the Indian Union Muslim League (IUML).
It was odd to see the IUML lead a rally, complete with party flags, in Changanassery, Kottayam district, in support of Hindus protesting the opening up of Sabarimala. But there’s a good reason why IUML general secretary P.K. Kunhalikutty is openly backing maintenance of status quo at the Ayyappan temple. Inspired by the Sabarimala verdict, NISA, a progressive forum of Muslim women based in Kozhikode, has announced it is approaching the top court to demand that women be allowed to enter Sunni mosques, a move that the party clearly does not approve of. Besides, the previous UDF government of Oommen Chandy had filed an affidavit in the SC that the traditions of Sabarimala temple should not be disturbed.
The first salvo in the campaign against the SC judgement was fired by the New Indian Express at a time when the RSS had welcomed it. In a front page editorial, Manoj Kumar Sonthalia, chairman and managing director of Express Publications, warned that the judgement “may be the beginning of a new age of faith-denouncing and faith-asserting litigations. Are the courts prepared for such an avalanche? Is the nation?” The editorial line received the immediate support of Congressman Ramesh Chennithala, a strident critic of the verdict, who tagged it in his tweets. Chennithala, who describes himself as a dedicated devotee of Ayyappan, has been fierier than his saffron counterparts in his criticism of the SC and the refusal of the Pinarayi government to file a review petition.

The LDF Govt & board should seek a review petition against the Sabarimala https://t.co/4KqMfGXaPB now seems that the verdict was based on wrong arguments & divergent views taken by the LDF Gvt & Board before the SC.I concur to the views that rationality shouldnt overtopple faith pic.twitter.com/jXvP1pO4Mh
— Ramesh Chennithala (@chennithala) September 30, 2018

It was only later that the RSS changed its position from welcoming the judgement to censuring it. With the Lok Sabha elections round the corner, the RSS-BJP is clearly scenting electoral blood in the Sabarimala issue given the widespread annoyance of Hindu believers with what they see as the “interference” of the court in matters of faith and age-old rituals. That’s why both the organisations have done a complete U-turn on the SC judgement however embarrassing and damaging the volte face is to the declared stance of RSS.
The most awkward retraction has come from RSS senior leader Suresh Joshi who has been espousing temple entry for women since 2016 and had declared that entry into places of worship has to be irrespective of caste, sex and creed. But Joshi’s initial enthusiasm for the SC verdict faded pretty quickly with Nagpur headquarters of the Sangh saying the sentiments of thousands of devotees, including women, should be respected.
Deftly, the RSS has turned into a political confrontation by accusing the CPM government of Pinarayi Vijayan of being responsible for the violent reaction to the verdict. “Unfortunately, the Kerala government has taken steps to implement the judgment with immediate effect without taking the sentiments of devotees into consideration. There is an obvious reaction to the same by the devotees, especially women, who are protesting against the forceful breaking of the tradition,” Joshi said.
File photo of devotees at the Sabarimala temple. Credit: PTI
The RSS-BJP has found natural allies in the upper caste organisations that still hold sway in Kerala more than six decades after it made history as the first state to elect a communist government. From the Kerala Brahmana Sabha (KBS) and the Tantri Mahamandalam (a collective of the priestly class) to the Nair Service Society, the upper caste have banded together to force the CPM government’s hand. These organisations have filed review petitions in the Supreme Court saying it had erred in calling the restrictions on women at Sabarimala a gender discrimination issue pertaining to menstruation. The court, they maintain, is not “whether the practice in question is an essential aspect of Hindu religion” but whether the impugned practice is an essential aspect of the Sabarimala temple… “The Court has completely ignored the diverse practices, traditions and schools which exist within the Hindu faith.”
These are legal niceties which will obviously take time to be heard and sorted out. What matters at the moment is how the Pinarayi Vijayan government deals with the ugly situation in the small towns which form the base camps for pilgrims making the trek to the shrine and more importantly with easing the charged atmosphere in the state. While dozens of RSS supporters have been arrested at Nilakkal and Pamba for violence and obstructing women pilgrims, the government has its work cut out for it.
Also read: Sabarimala: With Congress and BJP on Same Page, LDF Could Face Upper Caste Backlash
In battle readiness are right-wing parties from the BJP and its NDA constituents among them the Shiv Sena. There is also Praveen Togadia’s Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP) which has walked from Pandalam, the putative birthplace of Ayyappan, to Thiruvananthapuram calling on the Central to government to pass a law freeing the control of the Devaswom boards and the state government. Adding to the tense situations are toxic speakers like Sadhvi Prachi and Sasikala Teacher (of the Hindu Aikya Vedi), a Kerala-based organisation that spearheads a relentless communalisation drive in the state. BJP leaders are often drawn from HAV, most notably its general secretary Kummanam Rajasekharan who was president of the Kerala BJP till he was made governor of Mizoram in May this year.
If the Congress in Kerala is finding itself in bed with Hindu right-wing on Sabarimala, it does not appear to be discomfited. Although they claim they are not acting in concert, their views are in perfect tandem. Both maintain that the sentiments of the vishwasi (believer) should not be upset. Both also laud the dissenting judgement given by Justice Indu Malhotra who had said “Issues of deep religious sentiments should not be ordinarily be interfered by the court… What constitutes essential religious practice is for the religious community to decide, not for the court.”
But for the Congress, the political calisthenics of maintaining complete divergent views by the party high command – the All India Congress Committee has welcomed the SC verdict – and its Kerala branch has become a matter of embarrassment if not outright popular ridicule. And it is bound to further erode the party’s credibility. If the Congress persists with its strategy of seeking a consolidating of the Hindu sentiment – and vote – it is unlikely to pay dividends for party, according to some observers. “Congress will be just a shadow of the BJP in Kerala if it banks on the Hindu vote to bring it back to power,” believes a professor of history who did not wish to be named. “Hindu consolidation will only help BJP.”
Is Kerala at an inflexion point? Perhaps, it is. When BJP leaders talk of a turning point in Kerala politics it may be more than wishful thinking given the success of the insidious communalisation crusade by the saffron outfits over the decades. Efforts of organisations such as HAV are paying off in different ways even if it has not succeeded in providing electoral dividends as yet for the BJP. In local elections, BJP is making its mark and faring much better than the Congress.
For the Left, religion has been a poisoned chalice. Its efforts to propitiate the religious beliefs of the Hindus by including celebrations of religious festivals have not been much of a success given the aggressive push and counter propaganda by the BJP. In the case of Sabarimala, Vijayan, just back from the US after several weeks of medical treatment, knows he has to walk an extremely risky tightrope. His repeated statements that his government would implement SC orders at any cost are likely to alienate many of the party faithful who are also vishwasis. This may explain his sudden decision to allow the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB) to take its own decision on filing a review petition. Initially, the chief minister had lashed out at TDB president chief A. Padmakumar for criticising the verdict. Interestingly, Padmakumar is a former MLA of the CPM.
Even in Kannur, the home turf of Vijayan and other CPM stalwarts, there is a perceptible ‘Hindu sentiment’ among the party rank and file that appears to transcend Marxist ideology. R Pavithran, a union worker from Kanhangad, sums up the dilemma: “Sabarimala has its own customs and it is best not to meddle with religious beliefs customs. Our party [CPM] will get hurt if we are not careful. We should find a way out.”
Between the flood devastation and the Sabarimala quagmire, Kerala is, indeed, in an unholy mess.
